---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual and Monster Vault: Black Dragon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-black-dragon.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Black dragons are the sneakiest, and gothiest, of the chromatics. Their
favorite environment is a dismal dark swamp beneath whose fetid waters they can
hide to ambush their victims. Gloomy forests, acidic lakes under dank mountain
dungeons and places that touch the Shadowfell are also good lair material.

Every chromatic dragon seems to have some signature personality trait in
addition to greed. For black dragons, that trait is cruelty. These sadistic
creatures will hunt even when they're not hungry just for the pleasure of
torturing and killing a victim. For minions, they typically enlist tribes of
lizardfolk and other swamp-dwellers. They're also the first dragons in the
chromatic power ladder that might engage in complex plots to acquire more
treasure and power over their surroundings.

Black dragons breathe sprays of acid, and can envelop themselves in a shroud of
darkness. So even if a black dragon's lair isn't naturally gloomy and caustic,
they'll make it so. They're also amphibious, which is particularly annoying to
adventurers since it means their hoards will often be hidden underwater.

Like all dragons, they're Natural Magical Beasts with the Dragon keyword. Unlike
other dragons, they also have the Aquatic keyword, which allows them to breathe
underwater and enjoy a +2 attack bonus against non-aquatic opponents while in
there.

All black dragon age categories in each book represent increasingly powerful
versions of the same monster, with the main differences being between the MM and
MV representations, so we'll discuss the stats by book and not by age category.

## Black Dragon (Monster Manual)

The MM black dragon has trained Perception, Nature and Stealth, along with
Darkvision and Acid Resistance that varies with age. It can move equally fast on
land, water and in the air, with a further increased overland flight speed.

In every age category it has two basic attacks: a bite that does physical damage
and ongoing acid damage (save ends), and a weak claw. Its Double Attack ability
allows it to make 2 claw attacks as a standard action. The breath weapon is the
usual Reflex-targeting Close Blast 5 that recharges on a 5-6. It does acid
damage, ongoing acid damage, and gives a -4 penalty to AC (save ends both). Its
final standard-action abilities are our familiar Frightful Presence and Cloud of
Darkness.

The Cloud of Darkness ability creates a zone of darkness on a Close Burst 2,
which blocks line of sight for all creatures except the dragon. Anyone fully
inside it (except the dragon!) is also blinded, so darkvision won't save you
here. The zone lasts a turn but can be sustained with a minor action, and the
power recharges on a 3-6. I'm guessing this is more of an inky chemical smoke
thing than simple darkness.

For triggered abilities, it can count on the traditional Bloodied Breath, and on
a Tail Slash that triggers as a reaction when someone misses the dragon with a
melee attack. This is attack does a bit more damage than a claw and pushes the
target 1 square.

Young black dragons are Large Level 4 Solo Lurkers with 208 HP, Acid Resistance
15, speed 7, and Reach 2 on their melee attacks. They're clumsy fliers, but have
an overland flight speed of 10.

Adult black dragons are Large Level 11 Solo Lurkers with 560 HP, Acid Resistance
20, speed 8, overland flight 10, and Reach 2 on their melee attacks. Their
flight is no longer clumsy and gains the "hover" keyword.

Elder black dragons are Huge Level 18 Solo Lurkers with 860 HP, Acid Resistance
25, Speed 9, overland flight 12, and Reach 3 on their melee attacks. They also
gain a new ability: Vitriolic Spray, an encounter power that's basically a new
breath weapon. It does a bit less damage than the standard breath, but blinds on
a hit (save ends). Obviously, the dragon retains its normal breath weapon attack
as well.

Ancient black dragons are Gargantuan Level 26 Solo Lurkers with 1190 HP, Acid
Resistance 30, Speed 10, Overland Flight 15, and Reach 4 on their melee
attacks. They replace the standard Cloud of Darkness with Acid Gloom, which
works the same but also deals acid damage to any creature that enters or starts
its turn within. While the dragon itself would technically take this damage, its
resistance makes it immune to it.

## Black Dragon (Monster Vault)

The MV black dragons have the same senses, trained skills and movement modes as
the MM versions. Their acid resistance is a bit smaller, and it seems their
speed is a bit lower at the higher ages. Oh, and they gain Swamp Walk, allowing
them to ignore swampy difficult terrain. I only now realize the MM dragons
didn't have this, which is a glaring oversight.

At all age categories, their basic attack is a bite that does physical damage
plus ongoing acid damage on a hit, and a little bit of acid damage on a
miss. They can instead make two slightly weaker claw attacks, which end up
stronger than the bite if both hit the same target. The breath weapon does acid
damage and ongoing acid damage, without the AC penalty from the MM version.

Cloud of Darkness is replaced with Shroud of Gloom, a Close Burst 5 that
automatically gives everyone caught in it acid vulnerability and a -2 penalty to
attacks _until the end of the encounter_. A PC can spend a standard action to
make a Heal check and clear this condition from an ally. The DC of this test is
age-based, but not very hard - clearly the cost here is wasting a standard
action on it. Think of it as a thin layer of caustic gunk that must be scraped
off. I suppose a generous GM might allow a healing power to be used instead, but
this is purely a personal decision. This power is Recharge 6, too, so it's going
to be a problem more than once per battle.

For passive traits, they have the already-familiar Aquatic and Action Recovery,
plus Acid Blood and Instinctive Devouring. Acid Blood deals acid damage to
everyone adjacent to the dragon every time it takes damage while
bloodied. Instinctive Devouring allows the dragon to bite or charge someone as
its 10+rolled initiative action, or to end any stunning or dominating effect
that would prevent it from doing so.

Its triggered actions are Bloodied Breath and Tail Sweep. That last one is
triggers when someone misses the dragon with a melee attack. It has a Reach 1
greater than standard for the age category, and targets Reflex. On a hit the
target takes damage, falls prone, and everyone adjacent to it takes some
automatic physical damage.

Young Black Dragons in the MV are Large Level 4 Solo Lurkers with 208 HP. Their
acid resistance is 10, their speed 7, their melee Reach 2 (3 for the tail), and
their ongoing/incidental damage for the acid powers and the tail is 5.

Elder Black Dragons are Huge Level 18 Solo Lurkers with 676 HP. Their acid
resistance is 15, their speed 8, their melee reach 3 (4 for the tail) and their
ongoing/incidental damage 10. They also gain a new ability, Acid Gob, a Ranged
10 attack that targets Reflex. On a hit, the target is blinded and takes 30
ongoing acid damage (save ends both).

You should be able to easily interpolate the other age categories based on this.

## Sample Encounters

The two sample encounters in the MM are:

- Level 5, a young black dragon and 2 dark creepers. This is that Shadowfell
  flavor at work.

- Level 13, an adult black dragon, 2 trolls and a bog hag. Swamp dwellers unite!

## Final Impressions

In my experience, black dragons are the second most popular variant, being the
go-to choice for when you think a white is too weak and a red too strong. I note
that both versions of black dragons lack powers that would do increased damage
when it attacks from hiding, though I think that's actually OK here. This is a
solo lurker, so it needs to be able to do something effective every turn or the
fight will take twice as long. Still, this is a dragon that benefits even more
from being a part of an encounter group than the others.

The second sample encounter above is the more effective of the two, since the
trolls would be good at occupying the party's attention while the dragon strikes
from ambush. For added Fun(TM), you can say the dragon or the hag have used a
ritual to give them acid resistance and/or eliminate their weakness against
acid. If Pathfinder: Kingmaker can do it, so can you!

Elder black dragons sound like they could hang out with aboleths, since their
lairs could conceivably reach into the depths of the Underdark. The question
then becomes, who is using who? Clever GMs can find a way to make the answer be
"Both".
