---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: Artifacts of Gransys"
category: gurps
tags:
  - gurps
  - dragons-dogma
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/pawn-guild.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom.</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Our two [previous][1] [posts][2] cover "generic" equipment and magic items
pretty well, but the original game also has plenty of distinct items with
individual names. While some of those are just part of the traditional JRPG
upgrade treadmill, others would make fine artifacts for a **Dungeon Fantasy**
game. We'll discuss them here.

As described in these supplements, artifacts are magic items that don't follow
the default rules for such in GURPS. In Gransys, their most likely origins are
Magical or Material. In either case, they can't be further upgraded or enchanted
via alchemy, as they're already as good as they're going to get.

Any of the artifacts in **DF 6** and **DF Treasures 2** could end up making
their way into a GURPS Dragon's Dogma game. Obviously, none of them are
available for sale anywhere, and no living artisan would know how to make one
with the possible exception of some of the consumable items in those books. But
thre _is_ one other way in which a PC might come into possession of an artifact,
or even of a more normal magic item: Dragonforging.

Dragon blood has all sorts of magical and mythical properties in a lot of media,
and here it's no different. A weapon or suit of armor bathed in the blood of a
dragon as that dragon is killed becomes imbued with the beast's might! This
applies to lesser members of the dragon family as well as to The Dragon.

The mechanical effects of Dragonforging in GURPS "upgrade" the items worn or
wielded by a character in a manner similar to what's possible with standard
alchemy, but much more dramatic. It _always_ "maxes out" an item's mundane
quality descriptors, making it a close to ideal example of its kind. Armor
becomes fine; shields become balanced and fine; weapons become balanced and very
fine.

Additionally, the items gain additional enchantments commensurate with the power
of the slain dragon. Unlike with traditional alchemy, these are _not_ restricted
to what's available for sale in shops. In fact, this is a perfect way to
introduce Artifacts to the campaign! Even artifacts found as loot are likely to
have been used by some ancient hero to slay a dragon. The most powerful among
them are those used by an ancient _Arisen_ to slay _The_ Dragon.

Obviously, it costs nothing to enhance an item in this way, other than having to
fight a dragon.

[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/11/22/equipment-part-1.html
[2]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/11/25/equipment-part-2.html
