---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: The Sovereign Duchy of Gransys"
category: gurps
---

## Introduction

In this post I describe Gransys as a GURPS setting, as it is just before the
start of Dragon's Dogma. Aside from
the [_totally scientific_ research][previous-post] on its physical size, my
sources are the images and story from the original game, and the many scattered
bits of GURPS material on what a medieval fantasy setting should look
like. These include GURPS Fantasy, the various Low-Tech supplements, and a
couple of Pyramid articles. GURPS Adaptations provides the methodology.

As before, refer to [the map][map-link] over at the Dragon's Dogma Wikia when
necessary. Please note that I made up several of the details below for this
article, so if you find something from the original game or a secondary source
that seems to contradict this description, that's why.

## Physical Geography

Gransys is a sovereign duchy in an unnamed fantasy world. It's located in a
peninsula and bordered by several other nations, from which it is separated by
imposing mountain ranges and thick forests. These natural barriers and the sea
define its shape, which bears a vague resemblance to a capital J.

Its southern reaches are warm and relatively flat, with an almost Mediterranean
climate near the coast. They are separated from Central and North Gransys by a
mountain range. As we go north, we see a rise in elevation and a drop in
temperature: Central Gransys is hilly and temperate, with grassy plains and
deciduous forests. North Gransys starts as a large plateau and ends as a series
of windy mountain passes.

The duchy's largest stretch of forest is the Witchwood in South Gransys. It's
dense enough that little sunlight reaches its floor, and does contain a swamp in
its furthest depths, but it's not wet enough to be considered a jungle. Other
notable forests include the Verda Woodlands also in South Gransys, and the
deciduous Cursewood in Central Gransys.

Despite having quite a bit of coastline, Gransys has few sandy beaches. Most of
those are in South Gransys, with the rest of the coasts being made up of
imposing cliffs.

Gransys' non-monstrous fauna is similar to our Europe's, including rabbits,
deer, boars, ravens and seagulls. Its _monstrous_ fauna will be discussed in
future posts. Its river and sea waters have plenty of edible fish of all sizes,
though those sailing too far from the coast risk running afoul of sea monsters.

Appropriate Survival specialties for outdoorsy characters would be Plains,
Woodland and Mountains. Those who spend a lot of time in the deep Witchwood
would benefit from Survival (Swamp) as well.

Gransys has normal mana over the vast majority of its territory, as does the
rest of the world. Places where the local mana level varies, if they exist, are
small and isolated.

## Technology

Gransys' average Tech Level is what you would expect from a Dungeon Fantasy
game, which means it's 4 with a few important exceptions. There are no cannon or
firearms, though black powder _is_ known and used in the making of grenades and
other explosives. There is no movable type: written knowledge is disseminated
using the TL 3 method of hand-copying. Literacy is common in Gran Soren and
among priests and nobles, less so among peasants.

The best armor available are elaborate plate harnesses. Shields are also common
even for heavily armored fighters. Though fencing weapons are known, they are
not popular in Gransys.

Unlike standard Dungeon Fantasy, medicine is at TL 4, and is further boosted by
the abundance of potent medical herbs in the duchy. Some of those have innate
magical properties, whose fighters prefer broader and heavier blades.

Transportation is still at TL 3, with _naval_ transporation barely reaching even
that. Land-based trade routes are preferred over sea-based ones, due to the
large risk posed by sea monsters.

Agriculture is also at TL 3. Gransys farmers grow wheat and harspud, a peculiar
redish tuber rich in nutrients. They also raise cattle. Coastal communities
trawl nearby waters for fish. In both cases, meat is often preserved by
drying. Other crops include fruit like grapes and apples, often used for making
wine and cider.

## Government and Society

As a sovereign duchy, Gransys is ruled by a Duke who answers to no higher
political authority. He is surrounded by a court made up of nobles responsible
for smaller holdings within the duchy and by wealthy merchants who gain
influence from their commercial dealings with the nobles and the Duke himself.

The current ruler is Duke Edmun Dragonsbane, who was crowned fifty years ago
after defeating the Dragon. His legitimacy is entirely predicated on this feat,
as he was a common-born soldier at the time. Despite being at least 70 years
old, he's still in excellent physical shape. He has Status 7.

There are two _counties_ within Gransys, but they currently exist only on
paper. One covers much of South Gransys and used to be centered on Aernst
Castle, and the other covered the region around where Windbluff Tower now
sits. Their titles are held by Fedel, the Duke's nephew, and Aldous, the Duke's
chamberlain, and in practice serve to give them the authority to conduct the
Duke's business on his behalf. They are status 5. Someone who received the title
of Count and managed to claim the corresponding land would be Status 6.

Those knights given a direct ducal mandate receive the title of _margrave_, and
this includes those in charge of the three _border marches_ centered around the
Greatwall, Shadow Fort, and Windbluff Tower. These castles are meant to defend
Gransys from monster attack and foreign invasion, and by ducal decree are
supplied from the capital rather than from the surrounding lands. This serves
purposes both practical (the surrounding lands are inospitable) and political
(ensuring the soldier's loyalty is to the Duke directly), but in practice causes
serious logistics and morale problems. They are Status 4.

There are many smaller _baronies_ scattered throughout the kingdom and
administered from manor houses - most farming villages are technically part of
one such barony. The most influent among these barons usually spend their time
in the Duke's court and leave a chamberlain to tend to their day-to-day
business. The Duke doesn't usually concern himself with the affairs of barons as
long as they're punctual with the tribute. They are Status 3.

Below them are _landless knights_, who usually serve as part of someone else's
armed forces. Both male and female knights are called by the honorific
"Ser". They are Status 2.

Skilled artisans and well-off citizens are Status 1, average urban denizens are
Status 0, and peasant farmers are Status -1. The completely destitute are Status
-2, looked down on by everyone else.

Status is conferred by title or social convention. You are supposed to be
wealthy enought to maintain a lifestyle appropriate to your Status, or to
somehow fake it.

Those who wish to explore Gransys' stratified society in more detail or make
extensive use of GURPS Social Engineering should give the Status 2+ nobles
Feudal Rank equal to their Status. This Rank would symbolize their official
authority, while Status would be a measure of their social position and
political influence. This would make it possible to have a wealthy merchant like
Fournival from the original game, who doesn't hold formal Rank in the feudal
hierarchy but has Status 3 or 4.

If you're just interested in using Gransys as a backdrop for a Dungeon Fantasy
campaign, then Status and social position doesn't really come into play as an
advantage.

## Religion

The vast majority of Gransys' inhabitants follow the monotheistic religion known
as the Faith. Its trappings are quite similar to those of real world
Catholicism, and the god it venerates is called the Maker. It has existed for
centuries, and every village has at least a small shrine or chapel manned by one
or more priests. Gran Soren has a huge cathedral in its noble quarter. There is
also an Abbey in Northern Gransys, home to an order of nuns dedicated to a
humble life of quiet contemplation. The spiritual and administrative center of
the Faith lies outside Gransys, in the mainland.

Ordained members of the Faith go through intense training that ensures they are
quite the adept scholars. Aside from theology, they are well-versed in history,
ancient languages, and other disciplines. Monks and nuns of the Faith seem to
fill a role similar to that of academic researchers in our world.

In addition to the Faith, there are numerous signs throughout Gransys of an
ancient religion practiced in times past. It venerated entities now known simply
as "The Old Gods", associated with the four elements. Its ruined temples are
buried under the ground waiting for those bold enough to find them. The Faith
regards the religion of the Old Gods with scholarly curiosity, but frowns on
anyone who would consider it more than myth.

Religious Rank in the Faith goes from 0 all the way to 8, but no one in Gransys
has a Rank higher than 4 (the head of the Gran Soren Cathedral). Being an
ordained priest or priestess confers Clerical Investment in addition to Rank,
but brings no supernatural powers. Of course, nothing stops a priest from also
studying magic.

[previous-post]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/10/03/how-big-is-this-place.html
[map-link]: http://dragonsdogma.wikia.com/wiki/File:Gransys_map_large_w_labels.jpg
