---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: Characters, Part 1"
categories: gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/top_main_chara.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

While all those posts about the setting of Dragon's Dogma were a blast to write
and gave me an excellent excuse to exercise the **GURPS City Stats** rules, I
have to be honest and admit that they were not the first thing I thought about
when I decided to do a Dragon's Dogma adaptation. No, the first thing I always
think about converting in these cases are always the _characters_. Judging from
other efforts I've seen elsewhere, and from the fact that my post
about [Amiri][1] seems to be the most popular individual post in this blog, I'm
not the only one. And now I get to do exactly that!

The process is quite similar to what Mailanka has done in his [Psi Wars][2]
project, but a bit more accelerated since
I've [already settled on using Dungeon Fantasy as a base][3]. In this article,
I'll look at the basic concepts behind the class system in Dragon's Dogma, and
then look at how the templates from Dungeon Fantasy relate to the broad
categories defined by the original game. The focus is on the **DF 1** templates
and their direct derivatives when those exist. Future posts in this sub-series
will deal with the more exotic templates and with racial options specific to the
setting.

## Dragon's Dogma Vocations and Dungeon Fantasy's Templates

In the original game, the player character belongs to one of nine different
_vocations_, each with its own set of special moves. While a lot can be said to
describe each of them and their abilities, most of it is actually irrelevant for
our purposes!

Most of the particulars of how vocations work in Dragon's Dogma are either too
fiddly for a literal conversion (such as the numerous individual abilities), or
make no sense when removed from its original context and medium (like the fact
that you can switch vocations by going into an inn). Even most of the specific
vocations themselves don't merit a detailed treatment, as they simply implement
traditional fantasy archetypes in the context of those mechanics we're not using
anyway.

A better approach is to roll this specific implementation back to its basic
concepts, and look at it from the point of view of a character in the
setting. Never mind how much HP a fighter has or what their list of abilities
is. How would someone witnessing this character fight describe their style?

At its base, Dragon's Dogma is a class-based game. And the way GURPS Dungeon
Fantasy implements "classes" is through its templates. One thing from the
original games that I'll keep using in this article is the color-coding of
vocations, because it's more of a sylistic tool than a pure mechanic, and it
will help organize our discussion of how the DF templates fit into the
setting.

## Red Templates

In the original game, red vocations are based on _strength_. Their practitioners
are heavily armored and carry hefty weapons. Their abilities consist of creative
ways of bringing those weapons into contact with enemy skulls in melee
combat. Though they might achieve superhuman feats, these are the product of
mundane skill and prowess.

The _Knight_ template from Dungeon Fantasy fits this pretty much exactly, and
requires basically no change to fit into Gransys. Most actual knights should use
this template, and so Status 1 {5} or 2 {10} become discretionary advantages for
it in campaigns where that matters. It can also be used to describe common-born
soldiers trained in the fighting styles popular in Gransys.

_Barbarians_ also fit into this category, though they would most often be
wilderness-savvy melee combatants rather than enormous foreign savages. To play
such a character, do the following: Remove the discount for ST and HP, and
reduce discretionary advantage points to 22 to compensate. Reduce Basic Move to
6 and SM to 0. _Disregard_ the list of disadvantages and instead choose 40
points in disadvantages from the Scout list. A Barbarian with these
modifications and the more "nautical" outdoors skill picks could represent one
of the toughest fishermen in Cassardis.

A simpler, less angry alternative might be to use the Knight template with the
15-point Wilderness Training lens from **DF 16**, and add Outdoorsman 1-4
{10/level} to its list of discretionary advantages.

A lot of what the original game models as special abilities are standard options
for anyone skilled in melee combat in GURPS. All of the general and
template-specific martial power-ups from **DF 3** and **DF 11** should be
allowed, and liberal use of Extra Effort in Combat should be encouraged.

## Yellow Templates

Yellow vocations are based on _agility_. They wear light armor, and carry
weapons such as daggers and bows. Their abilities rely on acrobatic movement,
high-precision strikes or shots, and sometimes on dirty tricks such as flash
bombs or entangling snares. Fantastic though they may be, their feats are also
the product of mundane skill and prowess.

_Scouts_ are the best-fitting template in this category, as they play pretty
much exactly like an archery-focused Dragon's Dogma character, and their
wilderness survival skills are a welcome addition. Such a character might be a
scout for a military unit, a bandit (reformed or not), a solitary hunter, or
even a rural lordling with the addition of some Status and basic social skills.

The description above applies to _Swashbucklers_ as well. Fencing weapons do
exist in this world, but they're not popular in Gransys where combatants prefer
heavy armor and weapons that can defeat it. Interesting alternatives to them
include paired long knives or shortswords, which would play like a melee focused
strider from the original game. Broadswords and longswords also suit a
non-fencing duelist and provide a bit more damage in exchange for giving up
fencing parries. And there's always the option to play someone from a region
where fencing weapons and styles are common, like Ser Mercedes. In all cases,
add Status 1 {5} or 2 {10} to the list of discretionary advantages for the
template, like for Knights.

If you have access to the _Swords Against Evil_ article from **Pyramid #3/64**,
then the _Aristocrat_, _Duelist_ and _Rogue_ templates are also appropriate for
the setting, with the same observations on weapons as the base Swashbuckler. For
the Aristocrat, replace Higher Purpose (Blood Will Tell) {5} with Status 1 {5}
in campaigns where this matters, and add Status 2 {10} to the list of
discretionary advantages. Swashbucklers and Aristocrats could be foreign
dignitaries, or local nobility who spent time abroad and learned a foreign
fighting style. And when trained in local weapons any of the four templates
could represent anyone who relies more on skill and precision than raw strength
when fighting.

_Thieves_ certainly exist in Gransys, and though they're not as adept in a fight
as the other "yellow" templates their movement and, well, thief skills are still
as valuable as ever. They would be particularly likely to make use of those
dirty tricks mentioned earlier.

As is the case for the Red templates, all applicable power-ups from **DF 3** and
**DF 11** are allowed, and the use of Extra Effort in Combat is encouraged.

## Blue Templates

Blue vocations are based on _magic_. They wear robes or similar clothing, and
wield staffs more as spell-casting implements than as weapons. Their special
abilities are spells!

Normally, adapting the magic described in the original source would involve
careful research in an attempt to match the source's magic system with one of
the many offered by GURPS. In the case of Dragon's Dogma, though, most of the
work has already been done for us by a helpful NPC in the game itself.

According to wannabe mage Steffen, to work magic one must draw ambient energy
from their surroundings and channel it into the spell they wish to cast. This is
a difficult task that places great strain on the caster, particularly on their
cardiovascular and nervous systems. Therefore, despite the popular view of mages
as frail sorts, they need as much vigor and stamina as any warrior.

Other facts that can be glimpsed from the original's story and gameplay are that
casting a spell takes a few seconds at most, and that a magician has potential
access to several dozen spells, some of which are prerequisites for
others. Also, magic is commonly learned from books.

This just happens to be a perfect summary of GURPS' default Spell Magic
system, as detailed on the **Basic Set** and expanded in **GURPS Magic**. So
that's what we'll use!

_Wizards_ fit the description in the first paragraph perfectly. In fact, they
are the only type of spellcaster in the setting! This means that they have
access to the Plant, Animal, and Healing colleges of magic. They still have to
follow the prerequisite trees for those colleges.

The _Druid_ template can still be used to represent a wizard trained in
herbalism and wilderness survival. Replace Green Thumb 1 {5} and Power
Investiture (Druidic) 3 {30} with Magery 3 {35}. Green Thumb may still be taken
as a discretionary advantage, but switch the extra levels of Power Investiture
from that list with extra levels of Magery.

The _Cleric_ template can still represent a priest of the Faith who also trained
in magic. Replace Power Investiture 3 {30} with Magery 3 {35}, and reduce the
points dedicated to Divine abilities or spells from 25 to 20. Switch extra
levels of Power Investiture in the discretionary advantages to extra levels of
Magery.

We'll take a more detailed look at the magic system in the next post in this
series. Among other things, discuss what to do about those Druidic and
Divine abilities.

## A Note on Hybrid Templates

Hybrid vocations are those that combine the attributes of two of the previously
listed categories. They're one of the most distinctive aspects of the Dragon's
Dogma class system, so I'll dedicate an article to them right after I'm done
nailing down the last details of the magic system.

[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/10/02/pathfinder-df-barbarian.html
[2]: https://mailanka.blogspot.com.br/2016/07/a-psi-wars-primer.html
[3]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/09/29/dragons-dogma-big-picture.html
