---
layout: post
title: "Adapting Videogames"
category: gurps
---

Before I start with the whole Dragon's Dogma thing, I would like to discuss the
process of adapting a video game itself. It will help explain my decisions, and
why I think Dragon's Dogma will be relatively easy to adapt.

The excellent [GURPS Adaptations][adaptations] contains a wealth of detail on
how to adapt traditional fiction into an GURPS campaign, and while a lot of that
is equally applicable to adapting from a video game I feel there are some
important additional considerations. These concern _gameplay_.

"Gameplay" is a term that encompasses everything you do in the game as a player,
as well as the workings of these actions. Different genres of games give you
different levels of insight into these workings, from the intuitive feel you get
for your jumping distance in a platformer to all the numbers an electronic RPG
makes shows you.

Fiction has no gameplay. Even the longest fantasy novel with the most lovingly
described magic system will never make its readers do anything other than read
the text to see what happens next. Video games are the exact opposite of
this. Even the most immersive and story-intensive of games will always demand
that you pay as much attention to its gameplay as you do to its story and
setting.

If you think this sounds kinda similar to adapting from one tabletop RPG to
another, you're getting it!

Essentially, adapting a video game into a tabletop RPG campaign presents us with
all the difficulties of adapting fiction _and_ with all the difficulties of
converting material from a different game system!

The more transparent those mechanics are, paradoxically, the harder they make
the adaptation effort. When adapting mechanics, whether from a video game or
from other tabletop RPG, it's very easy to fall into the trap of trying to
convert them as closely as possible. While that can be an interesting
intellectual exercise, it rarely generates a simple and practical result.

My preferred approach is to rely on the strengths of the "destination" system as
much as possible, adapting the fiction and trying to recreate the same feel of
the original mechanics without getting hung up on its details. Whenever the two
conflict in the original, the fiction takes precedence. For games that are part
of a franchise, I pick from the bits of setting information and mechanics that
give me the most coherent picture (or at least the picture I like the most).

What does this mean for our specific project of adapting Dragon's Dogma to
GURPS? It means that we will not translate things like its vocations directly,
though we will make sure that some characters have primarily physical skills,
some are primarily magical, and some combine the two approaches. We will not use
a level-based progression, because that's not how GURPS works. We will not adapt
every one of its many items of equipment individually, but we might put
something in place to reflect the ability to upgrade gear. And we will
definitely not write up a long list of sidequests about killing 10 seagulls and
29 oxen.

In the end, I hope to have a campaign framework that is enjoyable to play and
fits GURPS idioms. And I hope you agree with me about the result :).


[adaptations]: http://www.warehouse23.com/products/gurps-adaptations
