---
layout: post
title: "Blog or Treat: The Grim Reaper"
category: gurps
tags:
  - gurps
  - monster
---

Welcome to our second Blog or Treat article! I wanted to do another scary
monster during this week, and figured there was no reason think small. So in
this post we'll stat up Death.

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/DDDADeath.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom.</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


## The Horror of Death

In the previous article we launched right into the stats of
the [Snake-Maned Lion][1], but here let's look at the historical and narrative
concepts around the Grim Reaper first.

According to the ever-helpful [Wikipedia][2], many cultures and mythologies
describe different personifications of death. It's not considered a bad thing in
all of them, which results in the messenger of death looking more like an angel
who merely takes the departed to the afterlife. However, the version we're
interested in is the black-robed skeleton with the scythe, an invention of
14th-century Europe. The name "Grim Reaper" is more recent, having been first
recorded in 1847.

The mention of "14th-century Europe" might ring a bell. Indeed, that's when the
Black Death swept through the continent. It's not a stretch to think that the
skeleton-and-scythe imagery comes from it. It's as much a personification of the
_fear of death_ as it is of death itself. The Reaper does not symbolize death as
part of a cycle, or a gentle passing into some higher realm. A scythe is not a
tool for gently picking individual wheat stalks. No, the Grim Reaper is the
Death that does to humanity what a farmer does to a field come harvest
time. It's the Death that takes away your loved ones in the prime of their lives
and then comes for you. You have as much defense against it as wheat does
against the farmer.

The monster and its variants statted up below draw inspiration from this
imagery, and from a couple of other similar creatures I've run across in other
games. It's appropriate for Dungeon Fantasy or horror campaigns, being a much
scarier threat in the latter.

## Grim Reaper

Long thought just a legend or a metaphor for death, these beings turn out to be
quite real. Most of what is known of them is pure speculation, as almost no one
who got into a position to take a good look at them survived the encounter. Are
they a form of spectral undead? A demon? Are they a _species_ of monster, or is
there just the one avatar of Death itself?

It is known that Grim Reapers are floating figures wearing voluminous, tattered
black robes and wielding large scythes. Beyond that, accounts vary. Some say
they look skeletal, others see a demonic horned visage, and others report only
darkness staring at them from beneath the hood. Some report it carring a lantern
in addition to the scythe.

One of the reasons it's so hard to get a precise account of how their look is
that these creatures inhabit a place between life and death. They are normally
completely invisible to mortal eyes, and intangible to anything physical! They
attack by reaching through this veil and pulling unwary mortals through. The
closer they are to the reaper's in-between home, the more than can interact with
it... and once they are close enough, the monster cuts them down with its
absurdly sharp scythe.

No one has encountered more than one Grim Reaper at once... but they tend to
hang out in places soaked in plague and/or evil, much
like [Snake-Maned Lions][1] and other similar monsters, so it wouldn't be
implausible to encounter it alongside these other creatures.

**ST** 18; **DX** 14; **IQ** 10; **HT** 12

**Dodge**: 10; **Parry**: 14; **DR**: 4; **SM** 0

**HP** 18; **Will** 12; **Per**: 12; **FP** 12

**Speed** 7.5; **Move** 7

- **Pull Through the Veil** (16): 1 point toxic, and the target becomes marked
  by the Reaper (see Notes, below). Reach C, 1. This is a _Cosmic_ attack that
  ignores DR, and affects substantial targets.
- **Grim Scythe** (18): 3d+3 cut _or_ 3d+1 imp _or_ 1d+1 cut
  (Hook). Reach 1. Often done as a Deceptive Attack. This is a _Cosmic_ attack
  that ignores DR! See Notes, below, for which targets are valid.

**Traits**: Astral Entity (p. **B263**); Dark Vision (with Color Vision);
Fragile (Unnatural); Flight (max Move 7); Enhanced Parry 2 (Scythe);
Indomitable; Immunity to Mind Control; Injury Tolerance (No Blood, No Brain, No
Vitals, Unliving); Skinny; Temperature Tolerance 10; Unfazeable; Vaccum Support.

**Skills**: Brawling-16; Two-Handed Axe/Mace-18; Observation-12;

**Class**: Undead.

**Notes**: When a target first becomes _marked by the Reaper_, they begin
perceiving their surroundings as blurry and colorless (-1 to Per-based rolls to
make out detail). Characters who have been marked once can see the Reaper in
full detail; they can attack it for half damage, and _it_ can attack _them_ for
half damage as well. Twice-Marked characters can interact with the Reaper as if
it was fully substantial and vice-versa.

These marks fade after a minute, returning the character to normal. The scythe
disappears when the creature is slain.

### Fighting the Grim Reaper

The Reaper attacks by invisibly approaching the most vulnerable-looking party
member, marking them twice, and cutting them down. Its touch grants it the
ability to isolate vulnerable adventurers without having to rely on terrain, as
it remains invisible and insubstantial to the victim's friends. It makes free
use of tactics such as Deceptive, Defensive, Committed or All-Out Attacks to
exploit holes in its opponent's defenses.

To effectively fight a Reaper, the PCs should have access to magic that allows
them to see and affect invisible and insubstantial creatures. Being undead, it's
also vulnerable to some Cleric and Holy Warrior powers. Lacking either of those,
they might contrive to get marked by the monster and fight it that way, though
that's pretty risky as it's a superb melee combatant. Its multiple injury
tolerances and high HT mean it might only die when it hits -36 HP, and it's
smart enough to fly away and try again when the marks have worn off.

Even a single Grim Reaper can pose a significant challenge to a whole delver
party.

### Variant Reapers

Plenty of variance is possible here by changing the answers to the questions at
the beginning of the monster's description.

_Different Class_: This variant is not undead, but is either a Demon or a Divine
Servitor. This either makes it vulnerable to a _different_ set of Holy powers,
or not particularly vulnerable to any of them.

_Greater_: This large variant carries an oversized scythe. It might well be
_the_ Grim Reaper! Change ST and HP to 27; change SM to +1; change scythe damage
to 5d+5 cutting _or_ 5d+2 imp _or_ 3d-2 cutting (Hook); change scythe range to
1-2.

_Lantern-Bearing_: This variant carries a skull-shaped lantern in addition to
its scythe. The lantern can cast Mass Sleep at power 15 and has a 30-point
Energy Reserve. Particularly cruel GMs can have the Mass Sleep be cast at power
20 instead. The lantern also disappears if the creature is slain.

_Materialized_: While still a spirit, this variant exists closer to the world of
the living than to the world of the dead. It's visible and almost solid, but
still difficult to hurt. Remove Astral Entity and the Pull Through the Veil
attack and replace Injury Tolerance (Unliving) with Injury Tolerance (Diffuse).

Incidentally, one of the inspirations for this monster is Dragon's Dogma, which
features a Greater, Materialized, Lantern-Bearing Grim Reaper in its most
dangerous dungeon.


[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/10/24/snake-maned-lion.html
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_(personification)
