---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: Character Races"
category: gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/top_main_chara.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

After covering occupational templates in some detail, it's time to look at
racial templates. What options do players have for creating non-human
characters?

The default answer is "not many". The original game started out with a more
traditional fantasy setting containing all the races you'd expect, but was
eventually developed into the setting we see when playing it. _Humans_ make up
the bulk of civilization in Gransys and the rest of the world. A minority of
alien _Pawns_ are the only non-humans who are also part of it.

There are other non-human sapients around: _Goblins_ and their _Hobgoblin_
cousins clearly have a civilization of sorts, and the various species of
_Saurian_ (humanoid lizards) are fairly sophisticated tool-users. However, their
views of humanity run between "fun to torment" and "tasty", with humans holding
an equivalent low opinion off them. Peaceful interaction between these species
is vanishingly rare. Other sapient monsters (such as the _Harpy_ and _Dragon_
families) are even less appropriate as player characters! These will all be
covered when we get to the monsters.

Below you will find two racial lenses for the Arisen and the Pawns. These can be
used as-is in the Dragon's Dogma setting presented in this blog, or in a more
traditional DF setting if the GM is willing to bring in the cosmic baggage that
comes with them. In those settings, the lenses can be applied to members of any
playable race, giving you characters such as elven Arisen or halfling Pawns.

But first, let's briefly discuss a setting element tied to both of these lenses:

## Setting Element: The Rift

The world of Dragon's Dogma is touched by the Rift, an interstitial realm that
appears as a dimly lit, fog-covered plain. The Rift connects multiple worlds,
and is the original home of the Pawns. The Dragon comes from somewhere beyond
it. The points where it touches the world are marked by _Riftstones_, and the
Arisen can use those to interact with the Rift.

We'll reveal much more about it in future posts, but for now it's enough to know
that the existence of the two racial lenses shown below in a setting also
implies that it's touched by the Rift and contains Riftstones. GMs using
different settings that already possess similar "planar travel" elements might
want to use those instead, or to integrate the Rift with them.

## The Arisen (10 points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/arisen-party.jpg" | prepend: full_base_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The Arisen are those who dare stand against the Dragon when it first enters the
world. For this, they are marked in a mystical ritual where the Dragon consumes
their heart. The stolen heart still beats within the beast, and so the victim
rises again compelled to confront it once more.

Having no heart, the Arisen also have no pulse or heartbeat. The ritual also
leaves a very large and distinctive scar in their chests, which is the same
shape for all of them. This scar can be covered up fairly easily, but it
sometimes glows through any clothing or armor when in proximity to a Pawn or a
draconic being. The Arisen also have the ability to interact with the Rift by
touching a Riftstone. By doing this they are able to draw forth specific Pawns
from the Rift itself and the worlds beyond.

They are widely respected in any society that is aware of their existence, but
that comes at the cost of being expected to confront the Dragon. Jealous or
snobbish nobles also like to impose "tests of skill" to Arisen characters so
they might prove they are "worthy" of the station.

The Arisen are portrayed as being unusually capable in the original games,
though it is unclear if this comes from their condition or if they were chosen
for being heroic in the first pÄºace. Either way, Arisen PCs shouldn't be built
on less than 250 points.

It's worth noting that the ability to drawn Pawns forth from the Rift is a
0-point feature. At most it's a way of acquiring an Ally (see Arisen Power-Ups
below), but usually it's just fancier dressing for the usual Search rolls to
find and hire henchmen.

**Advantages**: Injury Tolerance: No Vitals (Heart only, -50%) {3}[^1]; Hero 2 {10};

**Disadvantages**: Unnatural Features (No heartbeat, occasionally glowing scar)
{-3}[^2];

**Features**: Unaging[^3]; Can interact with the Rift through Riftstones.

### Arisen NPCs

The Dragon usually only creates one Arisen per incursion, but it's definitely
possible for more than one to exist at the same time. Even if the party already
includes an Arisen PC they might find others who are still hanging around from
previous draconic invasions. Their attitudes towards a PC Arisen will vary
greatly.

### Arisen PCs

An Arisen PC will necessarily bring with it the narrative of the Dragon. It must
be addressed, even if it's just a sentence in the character's back story
explaining how they avoided the confrontation. If it's publicly known that the
character avoided their "fate", the positive reputation implied by the Hero
advantage can be replaced by a negative reputation for cowardice or laziness
instead, giving everyone a -2 Reaction. It's worth -10 points, bringing the cost
of the lens down to 0.

There's nothing preventing multiple Arisen PCs from being on the same party!
Some of them might be old Arisen created in a previous invasion, or the Dragon
might just have decided to be more prolific this time around. It's not like
anyone can stop it from performing the ritual multiple times.

### Arisen Power-Ups

Most Arisen tend to acquire the company of an extremely loyal Pawn shortly after
being marked, known as their Main Pawn. If this Pawn is an NPC, then it can be
bought as an Ally (100% of points, Available Constantly) {20}.

And while not technically a "power-up", killing the Dragon removes the Arisen
lens from all of the Arisen it ever created, returning the hearts it retains to
their owners. Such characters retain the loyalty of their Main Pawns and the
respect of the rest of the Legion, but become normal members of their base races
and _immediately age to their natural age_. This _can_ cause an ancient Arisen
to crumble to dust on the spot, and it's the main reason why these might be
hostile towards their younger "siblings".

## Pawns (-15 points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/pawn_by_tiger_type-da2q9fi.jpg" | prepend: full_base_url }}"/>
  <figcaption><a href="http://www.deviantart.com/art/Pawn-609246270">By TIGER-TYPE on Deviant Art.</a></figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Any world subject to the cycle of draconic invasion is riddled with rifts that
open to a foggy place beyond it. From these rifts comes the Pawn Legion,
familiar yet alien.

Pawns, also known as "Myrmidons", have no childhood, and no parents. They spring
fully grown from the stuff of the Rift. Some are created by an Arisen, others
seem to be spontaneously generated, and some are brought over from other
worlds. Despite this artificial origin, they are very similar to humans
physiologically and still need to eat, drink and sleep as normal. All have a
"birthmark" of sorts in the palm of their right hands, shaped like an Arisen's
scar and known as the "pawnprint". This mark sometimes glows when in the
presence of an Arisen.

The main difference between a human and a Myrmidon is psychological. From a
human's point of view, Pawns have a cold and detached demeanor that makes them
hard to relate to. They do have emotions and the ability to display them, but
the way they do so feels "off" in way that's hard to describe. They also seem to
have a problem displaying significant personal initiative, which is why most of
them make a living as errant mercenaries, singly or in small groups. Unlike most
standard fantasy races, the average Myrmidon is an adventurer. It's the
"civilians" who are the rare exceptions. Regardless of their profession, all
Pawns consider themselves to be members of the "Pawn Legion", and never fight
each other.

Pawns directly created by an Arisen are unflinchingly loyal to their creator,
and all Pawns are predisposed to respect any Arisen they meet. They are unaging
and have very long memories. Those who feel particularly well-disposed towards
their master or employer might offer a constant stream of advice drawn from
these memories in an attempt to be more helpful. Fortunately, they can learn to
tone it down.

When a Pawn is killed, their body dematerializes. They can be drawn back to life
from the Rift by an Arisen. This weakens the Pawn's metaphysical cohesion, so it
can only be done a limited number of times before that individual is lost
forever.

**Advantages**: Eidetic Memory {5}; Extra Life (Requires an Arisen and a
Riftstone, -40%) {15}.

**Disadvantages**: Hidebound {-5}; Low Empathy {-20}; Social Stigma (Minority
Group) {-10}.

**Features**: Unaging[^3]; Reacts at +2 to Arisen; Cannot be resurrected by any
other means.

### Pawn NPCs

In the original game, all Pawns are AI-controlled characters, and their
psychological traits as described above are a justification for their in-game
behavior. It's similarly easy to make them NPCs in a tabletop campaign: any
sufficiently-sized city will have a small contingent of Pawns ready to act as
hirelings for an adventuring party. They're a little cheaper than equivalent
human help, which compensates for the increased supervision their lack of
flexibility requires. Like any hireling, they will refuse to work for a party
who purposefully endangers or mistreats them! Word gets around, even among
Pawns.

### Pawn PCs

PCs can choose to play a Pawn as well. In that case, simply use the racial
template above with the same type of template used by the other PCs in the
campaign. If another PC is an Arisen, then the Pawn PC will likely be their Main
Pawn, and should have a Sense of Duty towards the PC.

If no other PC is an Arisen but someone still wants to play a Pawn, it's
recommended that the GM either change the limitations on the character's Extra
Life or include an NPC Arisen who might perform the service of restoring the
dead Pawn. If neither appeal, feel free to delete this advantage and the
resurrection-related feature from the racial lens, making it worth -30
points.

### Pawn Power-Ups

Pawns who serve an Arisen for a long time or who develop strong relationships
with other non-Pawns might find their own souls strengthened by these
bonds. They may buy more instances of Extra Life for 15 points each, and Special
Rapport with their Arisen creator for 5 points. Additionally, they may buy off
the Low Empathy and Hidebound disadvantages from the lens. Extraordinary
circumstances might allow a Myrmidon to buy off the entire lens and become a
full member of their base race.

[^1]: When struck on the vitals from the front, roll 1d. On a 1-2, treat it as a
    normal torso hit.

[^2]: Gives +3 to any roll to identify you as Arisen. Identification is
    automatic when the scar glows!

[^3]: Not worth points in a Dungeon Fantasy game.
