---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: Towns"
categories: gurps
---

## Introduction

In this article, we'll discuss towns in Gransys. Unlike
the [villages and baronies][last-post] we discussed in this series' last post,
we actually do have an in-game example in the town of Cassardis. After talking
about what towns look like and what narrative themes they enable, we examine a
few possible sites for new towns in the map, and finish with two example towns
written using **GURPS City Stats**. One is new, and the other is Cassardis.

## Towns in Gransys

Towns are not just larger than villages, they're also made up of more permanent
structures and generally less isolated. They see enough traffic and trade from
nearby settlements that they can host a perpetual market. They're also more
likely to have walls, which will be either wooden palisades or stone structures.

While some of a town's inhabitants are still farmers, they make up a smaller
portion of the population. The rest take up the kind of job that requires a
higher population to support - builders, professional traders, more specialized
artisans. A lot of villages have a blacksmith, but this is the smallest type of
settlement where you might find an armorer.

That's usually enough for Dungeon Fantasy, but those who want to go deeper into
the social aspects of the setting can add some interesting hooks here. This is a
world transitioning between TL 3 and 4, and we can extend that to say that it's
transitioning between a feudal, medieval economy and a monetary, Renaissance
one. The original game offers some support for this notion during the quests
related to Fournival, a merchant who holds no title but has quite a lot of pull
with the Court due to his fortune and business deals.

Towns, then, are where you begin to see the tension between these two economic
models. They don't control a lot of farmland directly, but are the center of a
trade network that links all nearby villages, and part of a bigger network
connecting other towns further away. It's quite possible for an enterprising
merchant or artisan to make their fortune in this system without ever holding a
formal title. Historically, these people were the original _burgeoisie_, a term
which means literally "those who live in cities".

Therefore, it will be quite common for a town to be the stage of a conflict
between these wealthy merchants or artisans and the nobles that are supposed to
rule over them. Nobles that live away from the town in a rural manor will soon
find their townie subjects doing things behind their backs. Those who live in
town will face more direct resentment if they try to exert direct control over
its affairs. And, of course, there's always the possibility that the nobles and
merchants collude to hoodwink the Duke.

### Placing Towns

Cassardis is right there on the map, but it's not the only town in
Gransys. Where should an enterprising GM place their own made-up towns? They
would make interesting replacements for the "rest encampments" present in the
original game. Those consist of a handful of tents inhabited by a guard who
performs the same functions as an innkeeper and by a peddler who can also
enhance weapons.

In an expanded world it would make logical sense for those spots to contain
actual towns, since these are the kinds of services one would be able to find in
them. Aside from the possible political conflict outlined above, the GM can take
a cue from the neighborhood monsters to determine what other problems would
plague each place.

### Example Town: Hardship

The town of Hardship grew out of a logging camp, and took its name from the lake
on whose shores it was built[^1]. Now it's a trade hub for the villages around
the lake, and a rallying point for the caravans bearing tribute to Gran Soren
and supplies to the Shadow Fort. Since the latter are few and far between during
the best of times, Hardship's mayor has long had an arrangement with the Shadow
Fort's commander.

However, he's had no luck in calling in those favors recently, as the fort's
garrison has been too busy worrying about the goblins massing in the mountains
beyond Gransys to do something about the rumors of a dragon sighted in the
nearby forest. And it's unlikely they could do anything to the ghosts that rise
from the lake at night. As if the biting, disease-carrying insects that rise
from it by day weren't enough.

**Population**: 1,500 (Search -1)

#### Physical and Magical Environment

**Terrain**: Swampland;
**Appearance**: Unattractive (-1);
**Hygiene**: -2;
**Normal Mana** (Common Enchantment)

#### Culture and Economy

**Literacy**: Accented;
**TL**: 4;
**Wealth**: Average;
**Status**: -2 to 3

#### Political Environment
**Government**: Dictatorship, Feudal, Municipality;
**CR**: 4 (Corruption -2);
**Military Resources**: $75K;
**Defense Bonus**: +5

### Example Town: Cassardis

The coastal town Cassardis was settled hundreds of years ago by people from a
different culture than the one dominant in Gransys. Their dress and architecture
resembles that of our Mediterranean cultures. Until recently, it was completely
independent from the duchy.

Most of its hardy inhabitants are fishermen rather than farmers. Many actually
sail out in boats to harvest the bounty of the sea, which would sound downright
suicidal to an outsider. This fish-based diet is complemented by vegetables
grown in domestic gardens or in fields outside the town's sturdy stone
walls. Cassardis fishermen also sell plenty of dried fish to the rest of
Gransys.

The people of Cassardis are long used to repelling monster attacks by
themselves, and a lot of them receive at least some combat training from an
early age. They are well-acquainted with the goblins plaguing the lightly
forested hills beyond the town's fields. These attacks greatly increased in
frequency and intensity a while ago, which has prompted a drastic and
unprecedented decision from Adaro the village chief. He has requested help from
the Duke in exchange for allowing Cassardis to be annexed into Gransys.

Now Cassardis hosts a garrison of the Duke's Men, and has to pay taxes and
tribute in exchange. Adaro is still chief, and though there is some ressentment
against him for the annexation no one can deny the soldiers help keep the town
safe.

In a Dragon's Dogma campaign, as in the game, this town of badasses is the
perfect place for PCs to come from. Its self-reliant nature can help explain
where the PC's adventuring skills come from, and its isolation from the rest of
Gransys is a perfect excuse for why they're initially ignorant of the duchy's
situation. It also has its share of problems that can be looked into, although
it's generally a lot better off than places like the appropriately named
Hardship.

**Population**: 2,000 (Search -1)

#### Physical and Magical Environment

**Terrain**: Island/Beach;
**Appearance**: Average (0);
**Hygiene**: 0;
**Normal Mana** (Common Enchantment)

#### Culture and Economy

**Literacy**: Accented;
**TL**: 4;
**Wealth**: Average;
**Status**: -1 to 3

#### Political Environment
**Government**: Dictatorship, Municipality;
**CR**: 4 (Corruption -1)
**Military Resources**: $100K;
**Defense Bonus**: +7

[last-post]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/10/06/villages-and-baronies.html

[^1]: The origin of Lake Hardship's name is lost to history.
