---
layout: post
title: "Equipment Upgrades in Dungeon Fantasy"
category: gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/pawn-guild.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom.</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

While the [previous post][1] gives you a pretty complete picture of the gear
available to Gransys adventurer's, there's one aspect left to cover that can
really bring that Dragon's Dogma feel: equipment upgrades. Obviously, these
rules can also be used to good effect in generic **Dungeon Fantasy** games.

## Upgrades in the original game

The original game not only has a very extensive selection of equipment, it also
allows the player to _upgrade_ each of those items. Certain weapon vendors can
apply from one to three upgrade levels to a weapon or a piece of armor. Each one
increases its damage or protection value and decreases its weight. This both
costs money and requires "special components". More often than not, that means
_monster parts_, though some might require specific types of ore or
miscellaneous items like buckets and sconces instead. It's unclear whether these
upgrades are a mundane or magical process.

In addition to this, when the player kills a dragon there's a chance that their
equipment may be "Dragonforged", which improves it beyond what's possible with
the normal upgrades. These and the further alchemical "refinements" possible in
the **Dark Arisen** expansion are definitely magical. They also have a nice
mythic resonance!

The game does still have a sizable selection of weapons of increasing
effectiveness that's common to most electronics RPGs. Sometimes it's better to
trade up to a better weapon, and sometimes it's better to keep upgrading the one
you have. Generally, though, you want to keep getting better weapons until the
very end of the game, when you pick a high-level set that has the abilities you
want and max their upgrades out.

## Designing the Upgrade System for GURPS

We've seen what the system in the original game looked like. Does something like
that have a place in the tabletop version? If so, can we implement it without
needing to come up with a detailed list of monster parts required for each of
the hundreds of entries in GURPS' gear books?

The "upgrade pattern" for weapons and armor in **GURPS Dungeon Fantasy**
resembles the end-game pattern for Dragon's Dogma from the start. PCs either
start with their preferred weapon and armor types, or acquire them very soon
into the game, and from that point on they seek to improve either the _quality_
or the _enchantments_ in their gear.

The big difference here is that "upgrading" a piece of gear in DF means
replacing it with an entirely new piece that was either bought in town or found
in a dungeon. You can't really add better quality descriptors to a given item,
which is realistic. And while you _can_ add or replace enchantments to a magic
weapon by the rules, in DF the best magic is usually found as dungeon loot. When
that happens, it's better to use the new item than to cling to the old one.

An upgrade system should challenge that assumption. It should give PCs the means
to improve both the quality and the magic of a given piece of gear without
having to replace it. It should give them tangible benefits for choosing this
route over the traditional one, but it shouldn't be so good that replacing gear
is never a feasible option.

One benefit of an upgrade system is that an upgraded item _is still the same
item_. This gives players a little more incentive to invest in Signature Gear,
Weapon Bond, or Armor Bond without fear that the points spent in these perks
will be wasted. Another benefit is that it can be slightly cheaper to upgrade an
item if the player can meet the necessary conditions.

## The Upgrade System: Gransys Alchemy

As we said in previous posts, enchantment in Gransys isn't the province of
wizards. Instead it's an expression of mastery in artisanship, borrowing from
the old belief that each artisan learned the secret magic of their own
profession as they progressed in skill. It's a lot more similar to alchemy than
to standard spellcasting - through knowledge of these secrets, an armorer can
_refine_ a weapon or suit of armor and get it closer to its platonic ideal.

These secrets are jealously guarded, and usually the province of NPCs. Anyone
who knows them is more than able to make a comfortable living without needing to
mess with dungeon-delving! Some of these processes do require rare ingredients
only found in dangerous places, but that's what adventurers are for.

This means that PCs with access to a skilled artisan can improve the quality of
their weapons and armor by paying the difference in cost between the initial and
final state of the item. Add up the CF of the desired options and multiply that
by the item's base cost.

Adding _magical_ enhancements to an item follows a similar process, though only
those enchantments marked as available for sale in **DF 1** can be added in this
way. Simply total up the cost of the enchantments you wish to add. Adding a
better version of an existing enchantment (say, Puissance 2 to a weapon that
already had Puissance 1) does _not_ grant a discount! The old enchantment is
simply lost.

The number of master artisans capable of imparting more powerful magic into an
item can be counted on one hand. They all seem to have paid some unspeakable
price for their knowledge, and either live in remote places surrounded by
danger, make outrageous demands of potential customers, or _both_.

Only half of the upgrade cost represents the artisans's wages. The other half
represents the materials and alchemical components required for the process. The
PC can provide them directly to the artisan instead, thus saving some money in
exchange for the time spent and the risks taken in finding them. The more
extensive an upgrade, the greater the chance the artisan simply doesn't have the
necessary materials in stock, which means the PCs _must_ go out and find them.

As we're dealing with sympathetic magic and not with mundane craftsmanship,
these materials take many surprising forms. Aside from the metallic ores you
might expect, upgrading a given weapon might require things like crystals, rare
flowers that only grow near active volcanoes, or hydra gallstones.

Somehow, it seems this stuff is never found just lying around in a peaceful
meadow. Mineral ragents require rolls against **Prospecting** to find and
extract. Rare plants require rolls against **Naturalist** or **Herb Lore** to
identify and harvest. And monster parts require combat skills and everything
listed under **Dead Monster Bits** in **DF 2**, p. 13. Alternatively, if you
have **DF 19** you can use **Professional Skill (Dungeon Butcher)**.

Each component contributes a certain monetary value towards the upgrade of an
item, determined by the GM. Better components are more difficult to find and
usually heavier. This table can act as a guide:


|Quality |Value|
|-----------------+-----|
|Basic            |$300 |
|Good             |$1000|
|Fine             |$3000|
|Legendary        |$10K or more|

<br/>

Note that the value listed above is _only_ for the purposes of contributing
towards upgrading a given item. PCs who go around harvesting random generic
components for sale can expect to get around 5% of that price or less for
anything less than Legendary components. Legendary components are never random
or generic: they're treasure!

There is no fixed table of what each component requires. The GM is free to
either come up with a fixed "shopping list" on the spot for each process, or let
players present their own with justifications as to why they fit. If the GM
judges a particular component is particularly resonant with the item being
upgraded, they can have it count as a higher category.

At the GM's option, PCs seeking only relatively minor upgrades can simply pay
the full cost in money - either the process didn't require any special reagents,
or the artisan had them on hand already.

## Example: Ser Alexa's Family Sword

Ser Alexa wants to turn her decrepit family blade into a weapon worthy of an
hero. While she could perhaps afford a new sword, she wants to use this one to
rid her barony of bandits. It's the sword she trained with as a young squire,
and she has a Weapon Bond to it. She also sees its state as symbolic of her
family's fortunes, and thus restoring it to its full glory would be a good
omen. She asks Master Caxton, an armorer from Gran Soren, to perform the service
for her.

In game terms, Alexa wants to make her Cheap thrusting broadsword Balanced,
Very Fine, and Silver-Coated. Going from Cheap to Good quality is +0.6 CF;
the other options add up to +25 CF. Multiplying all of that by $600 gives us
a final cost of $15360.

This turns out to be far more money than she has on hand at the moment, so she
settles for making the sword a Good-quality blade for $360, paying all of that
in coin. After conferring with the weaponsmith, she spends the next few days
looking for alchemical reagents that resonate with that particular sword and
with her family legacy: dust from the family crypt, a scrap of silk to signify
nobility, unspoiled silver ore from an old haunted mine in the barony, and a
rare flower that only blooms at night and features prominently in the family's
coat of arms. That last one was especially hard to find.

The GM judges that the first two components are Basic, the silver is Good and
the Flower is Fine, for a total of $4600 in value. However, since Alexa has gone
to the trouble to make sure every one of them is symbolically related to her
quest to bring glory and prosperity back to her family, they also decide that
these components are enough to cover the $7500 material cost of the upgrade
after all.

That still leaves another $7500 to cover Caxton's wages, which the Impulsive
Alexa acquires by pawning off the family jewels she smuggled out of the
barony. Nothing ventured, nothing gained!

[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/11/22/equipment-part-1.html
