---
layout: post
title: "Warforged for Dungeon Fantasy"
tags:
  - gurps
  - dungeon-fantasy
---

Eberron is pretty much my favorite published D&D setting, and Warforged are my
favorite Eberron race. What would they look like in Dungeon Fantasy? Let's find
out!

In the racial template below I've tried to follow the same guidelines as the
races in the **DFRPG**: they must alter the character enough for you to feel
like you're playing a member of that race, and they can't cost more than about
40 points. This should allow characters following almost any professional
template to be a Warforged if they so wish.


## Warforged

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/warforged_knight_by_will_e_h-d6ewj3b.png" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption><a
  href="https://will-e-h.deviantart.com/art/Warforged-Knight-387829415">Illustration
  by Will-E-H</a></figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


**Racial Cost: 30 points**

Warforged are living constructs. In Eberron, they were created and mass-produced
by a powerful enchanter house, which sold them as ready-made armies to some of
that setting's warring nations. Once the war was over, most were freed and given
citizenship. In other settings, their origins are usually less industrial: a
warforged delver might be an experiment by a lone wizard, a relic from a lost
civilization who was only activated now, and so on.

Warforged are more or less human-sized and -shaped, but are obviously made of
metal, wood, and stone rather than flesh. Most look nearly identical save for
the mystic sigil in their foreheads, which is different for every individual. A
few have taken the time to customize their bodies and individualize their
appearance.

Warforged are a little stronger than humans, but their real advantage over human
soldiers lies in ther immunity to most weaknesses of the flesh. They don't need
food, water or even air, and though they must spend some time at rest each day,
they don't really sleep either. Unlike a "proper" golem, a warforged has a fully
sapient mind and soul, too.

They are still _alive_, though, and still subject to some of those fleshy
weaknesses. They have and can spend Fatigue Points. They are not considered
Unliving or Homogenous, and still vulnerable to poisons and such that enter
their bodies via means other than breathing or ingestion. They can be affected
by Mind Control spells and other similar magic. And no-mana areas are deadly to
them, which is something most other delvers don't need to worry about. On the
good side, Healing magic works fine on Warforged.

Even a newly-created Warforged will have the skills of a veteran fighter and an
adult-level intellect, but that individual will also lack most of the social
graces you would expect from someone with an adult-level intellect. Even after
they overcome this initial awkwardness, people still tend to look at then a bit
oddly given their exotic appearance and origin.

**Attribute Modifiers**: ST+1 {10}; HT+1 {10}.

**Advantages**: Composite Plating 1 {5}; Doesn't Breathe {20}; Doesn't Eat or
Drink {10}; Unsleeping Watcher {10}.

**Disadvantages**: Dependency (Mana) {-25}; Social Stigma (Minority Group)
{-10}.

**Features:** Individuals look very similar to each other.

### Special Warforged Traits

#### Composite Plating[^1]

Your skin is made of metal and wooden plates. This works like one level of the
Barbarian's Tough Skin (**DRRPG Adventurers**, p. 16), but it's _not_ flesh! It
does protect against attacks that require a scratch or skin contact but don't
manage to get past its DR. You can still wear armor normally.

At the GM's option, a warforged character might be able to buy up to two more
levels of this trait in play. It requires spending some time in a machine shop
along with 5 points and $500 per level.

#### Dependency (Mana)

As the monster trait on **DFRPG: Monsters**, p. 13. You lose 1 HP per minute
you spend in a no mana area.

#### Doesn't Breathe/Doesn't Eat or Drink

As the monster traits in **DFRPG: Monsters**, p. 10.

#### Unsleeping Watcher[^2]

Instead of sleeping, you must enter a state of inactivity for at least 4 hours
per day. While in this state, you remain conscious and aware of your
surroundings, so you _can_ keep watch while resting. If you can't rest like this
on a given day, treat it as a night of missed sleep.

### Optional Traits

Warforged characters may add the following disadvantages to the list of optional
traits for their professional template, if those aren't already there: Chummy
{-5}; Clueless {-10}; Gregarious {-10}; Gullibility {-10}; Code of Honor
(Soldier's) {-10}. These represent the social awkwardness or initial programming
of a newly-created warforged. Since they are personal disadvantages, they do
count toward your disadvantage limit.

### Warforged Characters

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/female_warforged_by_edymnion.jpg" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption><a
  href="https://edymnion.deviantart.com/art/Female-Warforged-12780713">A female warforged</a></figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


While warforged were made to be members of the fightier professions, they can do
equally well at any of them! That little bit of extra DR will come in handy to
delvers who have to rely on lighter armor. Warforged are an excellent choice for
players who don't want to bother with buying rations and sleeping bags, or
succumbing to poison gas traps. On the other hand, they have social difficulties
in town, and their fleshbag buddies will always ask them to take the watch when
setting up camp.

Warforged gender is mostly a matter of personal preference, perhaps accompanied
by the use of the Armory skill. Warforged usually choose names from the culture
in which they live, but some prefer simple one-word names that allude to their
vocation or personality. A holy warrior who lives to protect the weak might name
himself Shield, and there's that one guy who called himself Awesome Bucket.

[^1]: GURPS stats: This is just unmodified DR at 5 points/level.

[^2]: GURPS stats: This is Less Sleep 4 with a +25% modifier to allow the
    character to stay conscious during the required sleep period.
