---
layout: post
title: "Operation BRUTAL ADVENT, Part 3"
category: gurps
tags:
  - gurps
  - x-com
  - actual-play
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/xcom__extraction_by_antimingebag-d9abdgp.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href=http://antimingebag.deviantart.com/art/XCOM-Extraction-561522409>
      Illustration by AntiMingebag on DeviantArt
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


Welcome to another installment on
my [GURPS X-COM: Noises in the Dark campaign report][1]! This is the final
installment of Operation BRUTAL ADVENT, our group's inaugural mission. The
following PCs participated in it:

- **Kendall Fairbarn**: A paranoid hacker from the UK. Was completely convinced
  human society had been heavily infiltrated by shape-changing aliens... and it
  turned out he wasn't entirely wrong.
- **Minette Duvall**: A bomb-disposal expert from Southern France, Minette is
  also quite handy with a rifle. She's devoutly Catholic and swears a lot when
  faced with danger, which is all the time.
- **Niu Yulan (AKA Julia Yulan)**: A former hostage negotiatior from China.
  Julia is pretty handy with a rifle but her medical training and innate
  kindness are equally important parts of her arsenal.
- **Jack Choi**: A former police detective from Hong Kong, and a staunch
  adherent of the "kick down the door" school of policing despite his light
  frame.

The following NPCs also had important roles:

- **Valenkov** and **Gutierrez**: A pair of shooters from Russia and Argentina,
  respectively, both members of the squad who lost their players just before the
  start of the mission.
- **Yevgeny Korsakov**: The pilot of the squad's Skyranger transport.
- **Jan Wiest**: A cop stuck in the anomaly zone. Together with his unit, he's
  been fighting the aliens for months.
- **Gisela Vahlen and company**: Seven civilians inhabiting a building inside
  the anomaly zone. Three of them are relatives of Dr. Vahlen, one of X-COM's
  top scientists.

## Recovery and Planning

The party had just survived their first [encounter with a Bakegumo][2], and was
still reeling a bit from the experience. Choi, in particular, had been hit quite
hard by the hand-like alien, whom they decided to call "Rosie". At least
Korsakov was recovered from whatever mind control he was under, and quickly
loaded the civilians up into the Skyranger, taking off to safety once that was
done.

Julia stepped up to apply first aid to Choi's wound, which probably included at
least one broken rib. She opened up her crash kit and noticed with much
consternation that any drug it contained that was more advanced than rubbing
alcohol had turned into some sort of foul black sludge. Pills, liquids, even
the stuff applied to hemostatic bandages, all gone bad. The kit had been
effectively reduced to TL 6 in terms of effectiveness! She was still able to
restore some of Choi's lost HP, but it took longer than it otherwise would.

After this is done, they get to planning. From everything they know so far, the
"distortion field" is preventing German authorities from noticing what's going
on in the affected zone. The squad decides taking this field out is their best
bet. Judging from the shape of the effect, they figure the source is in a
building just south of the hospital's parking lot. There's no telling on which
floor it is, though.

Jan Wiest, the cop, tells them his buddies have been working on a reckless plan
to assault the hospital. They've managed to get an old Toyota Hilux truck
working, and have loaded it up with anything even remotely incendiary or
explosive they could get their hands on. The plan is to send the vehicle
careening towards the northwest corner of the hospital as the opening move of an
all-in assault. They've clearly given this some thought, and this is the first
real opportunity to put the plan into action - the flashy assault should provide
the PCs with the distraction they need to go in through the opposite corner.

## Infiltration and Engagement

The PCs agree with the plan, with Valenkov and Gutierrez choosing to lend their
firepower to the distraction assault. Everyone gets into position, and as the
squad hears the distant explosions begin, they move in on the building from the
southwest corner. That section of the hospital is walled off, but the wall
happens to have a convenient, sturdy fuse box that can serve as a stepping
stone, and provides easy access to a second-floor window.

The hospital looks even more dilapidated than the other buildings in the
neighborhood, as it has been shot at more often. All the windows above the
ground floor are broken. Every bit of the outer walls that hasn't yet been
covered in bullet holes is instead covered in runic-looking graffiti. As they
enter through the window, the party notices the interior of the hospital doesn't
look much better. Paint has peeled or been torn off from the walls in places,
and the same graffiti is everywhere. All the lights are out, most of them
broken. The air feels dusty, and smells faintly of rot.

Choi rolls an unprimed grenade down the hallway, but nothing unusual
happens. Kendall has a harder time getting accurate readings from his sensors in
here - his chemsniffers, for example, report the air as being composed of 100%
hydrochloric acid. Still, he manages to pinpoint the source of the anomaly. It's
somewhere below them in the hospital's Geriatrics ward, which they can reach by
proceeding down this hallway. They cautiously move on.

In a minute they reach the stairwell and elevator. The sounds of fighting
outside are beginning to die down. Since the source is below them, they figure
the best place to put it would be all the way down in the hospital's extensive
basement.

Minette looks at the elevator and at the stairs, and has an idea: set up a bomb
inside the elevator and send it down to the basement, and then assault the place
through the stairs once the explosive goes off. This would turn any possible
ambush the aliens are preparing against them. The elevator comes from a higher
floor when called. Its light panels have been torn off and its walls covered in
graffiti. Minette sets up a proximity mine built from one of Choi's grenades and
an optical sensor Kendall got from a nearby automatic door.

They send the elevator down... and it blow up too early, with a much stronger
force than they anticipated. The blast climbs up the shaft with enough force to
buckle the doors on their floor. Looks like the aliens had prepared a little
surprise of their own at the basement! The squad quickly recovers from the
surprise and proceeds with their original plan, running down the stairs.

As soon as they emerge in a dark basement room, they begin trading shots with
the aliens down there. There are four of them, firing from rooms adjacent to the
box-filled space the party emerged into, wearing black military uniforms and
eyeless gas masks. Despite the lack of eyeholes, they can apparently see pretty
well in the eerie blue-green light suffusing the basement.

The fight is short but intense. Minette shoots two of the enemies early, while
Choi tries to flush another out of cover with more frag grenades. Instead of
running away, the alien draws a sword and rushes Choi! He and Kendall spend a
few tense seconds in melee combat before while Minette deals with the remaining
shooter, and are finally able to back away and shoot the last enemy.

With the fight over, they can assess their surroundings in more detail. They're
in a storage area filled with boxes containing medication and assorted medical
equipment. Every box that was hit by a stray bullet or sword blow is leaking the
same black sludge found in Julia's medkit. The green-blue light comes from some
sort of fluorescent mold that clings to the walls. The air feels musty and
heavy, and everything is covered in a thin layer of red dust.

As for the aliens, once unmasked, they look like faceless wooden puppets. Their
"skin" feels like some kind of dark wood, though the blood from their wounds
hints at fleshier interiors. Their weapons are single-shot rifles with a
strange, curvy design and no ejection ports. They did sound like they fired
solid ammo, though. The party decides to move on rather than speculating about
the alien bodies. Leave that to the scientists.

## The Anomaly

The eastern door out of the room opens into a wide corridor extending from south
to north. Kendall's sensors indicate the anomaly's epicenter is north, so they
go that way. The way is littered with scattered furniture and with larger and
larger alien fungal growths, some of which quiver when the soldiers pass near
them. The dust thickens as well.

They _almost_ miss the minefield, but Minette notices it at the last
instant. The devices seem to be made of a white material similar to fiberglass,
but their form factor simply screams mine. There were six, all placed in such a
way that the hallway's clutter would block line of sight to them. Now that they
know where the mines are, the squad can carefully walk past them. Running
through this area would still pose a hazard, though. After some deliberation,
they decide to push some of the hallway's furniture into the adjoining empty
rooms before proceeding, to make a future retreat through this area easier.

When they finish, they can hear shuffling and crashing sounds coming from a door
at the northern end of the corridor. Sounds like someone is getting ready to
flee in a hurry. They quickly move up, checking the adjoining rooms for
hostiles, and finally arrive at the source of the noise - and of the anomaly.

This is a large room where all of the hospital's remaining lab equipment and
computers were moved and set up atop a ring of heavy metal desks in the room's
center. Most of it is wrecked when the PCs arrive. Two of the soldier aliens and
a Bakegumo seem to be busy destroying everything, supervised by something that
looks like a pillar of black smoke with embers for eyes. Something lashes out of
the smoke, causing the PCs to feel as if the ve/

/ry ai/

/r was cut. It steps into the resulting rent in space, and it closes behind it,
returning the world to normal. Time for another firefight!

The Bakegumo turns to Minette, and begins doing a strange "dance". She begins to
hear the distant sounds of drums and brass cymbals, and the edges of her vision
begins to crawl. Minette gets off a long burst, but the alien seems to ignore it
as she begins to feel her own sins crawling on her back. A bullet from one of
the puppets hits her vest, and the pain snaps her out of it, allowing her to
finish the "Rosie" off.

Meanwhile, Kendall triggers another feedback look, trying to flood the alien
communications channel with an amplified version of the eerie chatter he
recorded earlier. It's enough to confuse them for a second, hurting their
accuracy enough that Choi and Julia are able to deal with the pair. With that,
there are no more hostiles in the room.

Julia takes the time to apply first aid to Minette, and just as she finishes
everyone notices the _trees_. A clump of five or so, all together at the center
of the ring of desks. Black trunks, black leaves, black branches heavy with fat
white fruit the squad recognizes as the _mines_ from earlier in the
hallway. They reach to the ceiling. This is the first time they are noticed, but
upon looking at them the squad knows they've been there the whole time.

Spooked, the PCs decide to blow the trees up using the hallway mines and their
last grenade, thrown from outside the room. The resulting blast devastating, and
as soon as the trees are gone the whole distortion field clears. A pressure they
didn't know they were under lifts from their minds. With the interference gone,
Wiest is able to reach them by radio and inform that the assault force managed
to take out all the remaining alien soldiers, but they lost a few men and
Valenkov and Gutierrez were gravely wounded.

## Denouement

Later on, the squad manages to reach HQ and discover that a second Skyranger is
on the way, called in by Korsakov, with a full cleanup crew. Over the next few
days, they direct the local authorities and collect everything from the area
that even looks alien. The civilians still living there are relocated by the
German government, with the exception of Gisela's family who, at Dr. Vahlen's
insistence, was moved to Mother Base. Hans, Gisela's father, joins X-COM as an
engineer.

Despite casualties, the mission was a success, reassuring the Council of X-COM's
effectiveness.

## Spoilers and Fight Analysis

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/puppets.jpeg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    The monster of the day. Art by Melissa Uran.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The new enemy they fought here were the Puppets of Ruin, depicted above. Named
"Pinocchios" by the group, these are the main front line troops of the
Dreams. They combine excellent military training (both modern and archaic) with
a total lack of compassion and a willingness to serve anyone who displays the
right mix of cruelty and strength. The ones you see above are in their "natural"
state - for this campaign, I decided that anyone who enlisted puppet units would
give them their own uniforms, hence the black fatigues with eyeless gas masks.

The originals are meant to terrorize medieval fantasy worlds, and carry the
equivalent of TL 7 military gear. Mine carry TL 9 equipment, which I will detail
in a future post.

The "pillar of smoke" alien was an addition of my own. It was meant to replace
the Night Hags from the Dreams of Ruin sourcebook, though at the time I didn't
know what was going to be behind the smokescreen.

While the puppets are good shooters and would be unholy terrors when pitted
against 150-point soldiers, the more powerful X-COM squad was rather better at
dealing with them. The hardest part for them was dealing with the puppets'
_melee_ proficiency, as none of the PCs put many points in close combat and none
of them had a weapon that could really stand up to the alien swords. No one
suffered damage from them, but it was more due to luck than skill or sound
tactics.

The same can't be said of the elevator trap or the minefield, though - success
there was entirely due to character skill and player ingenuity. Had the party
blithely taken the elevator down, it would have resulted in a TPK, as the bottom
of the shaft was lined with mines.

[1]: {{ "/projects/gurps-xcom-reports/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/gurps/2017/03/05/brutal-advent-part-2.html" | relative_url }}
