---
layout: post
title: "Planet Mercenary Actual Play: Character Creation"
tags:
    - planet-mercenary
    - actual-play
---

This last weekend I finally got to GM in real time again! It wasn't exactly an
in-person game, seeing as it happened over Google Hangouts, but it was the next
best thing.

I've been playing a bit of D&D 5th Edition with this particular group every
Sunday morning, also over Hangouts. It so happened that the habitual GM wouldn't
have the materials handy for a couple of weeks due to a trip, so I proposed a
session of Planet Mercenary to fill the gap and keep our momentum going. I had
just gotten the book (read my review [here][1]) and this would be a perfect
opportunity to try it out.

## Character and Company Creation

Since everyone was new to the system, I decided to set one of our two "gap"
sessions aside for creating characters. I started with a very basic overview of
the setting, and proceeded to use screen sharing to show the possible choices
for Command Package, Background and Sophont Type. The sophont type illustrations
were a big hit, particularly those of the Earth-born species.

I banned AI and Amorph PCs to start with, since those were marked as "Advanced"
and no one had much in the way of system experience. I'm glad I did, because in
my experience with science fiction games is that someone _always_ wants to play
a robot. We ended up with an all-Earthling crew, whom we'll get to meet shortly.

Point distribution was done simultaneously: I screen-shared the character sheet
for reference and answered questions along the way. Company creation was very
easy to explain: since most of the group was familiar with Ars Magica, I just
had to say it worked more or less like a Covenant. We took the suggested
starting stats to speed things up, because I knew that the next step there was
going to eat up most our time. Yes, I'm talking about _shopping_.

Starship selection was surprisingly quick, simply because the Dragon-class
Interdiction Cruiser looks like a Star Destroyer. It's also pretty good for its
class, mechanically, and one of the most versatile designs they could afford. So
I was pretty happy to let them choose it as their ship. The players named it
_Star Destroyer_, of course. It has the optional gun package and an add-on set
of light shields that I let them buy. When I told them startships were piloted
by powerful AI, they promptly named their ship AI _Skynet_.

Buying personal equipment was... less than quick, which is something I already
expected. Using Hangouts screen-sharing to show the lists to everyone at the
same time did make it a _lot_ faster than it would have been if I had to keep
passing a physical book or PDF-in-a-device around. The group got an APC so that
all players and their fireteams could ride around on the same vehicle, and spent
all the time I saved with the screen share trying to make their remaining
Supplies buy armor and weapons for all PCs after a couple of them blew mountains
of cash on expensive flying suits.

The finishing touches of character creation actually stretched into some
Whatsapp messaging over the week and the first hour of session 2. Here are our
results.

### Company: Skynet's Avengers

No one wanted to be the captain, so I was free to make one. Looking at the
mountain of pop-culture references thrown around both during general chatter and
in naming the ship and its AI, I decided that the _AI itself_ would be the
Captain.

Skynet is a ship-scale AI whose past is a bit of a secret. It's completely
addicted to old (or, in other words, comtemporary) Earth pop culture. All those
jokes the players made? They're canon. Skynet named itself after the evil AI
from Terminator, named the ship Star Destroyer because it resembles a star
destroyer, and speaks like GlaDoS because it likes GlaDoS. How it managed to
liberate itself and its ship from the UNS military is still a bit of a mystery,
but it currently runs a small mercenary company (named after the Avengers). Few
other people in the galaxy (aside from the Gavs) get all the jokes.

The company has the default attributes of AI Rating 3, Starting Resources 9, and
Reputation 4. Players spent 10 Resources on their ship, turned the remainder
into 70 supplies, and spent every last penny of that in personal gear, which
means Skynet's Avengers are desperate to find a job, any job, or else they won't
be able to make payroll next month. And we all know how bad that is.

### Player Characters

Our PCs make up the officer corps for Skynet's Avengers, and all of them hail
from Earth. I messed up a bit during fireteam creation, and they each ended up
with fireteams made up of 4 grunts. I'm leaving that as it is for now.

- **Max**, Human/Engineer/Driver. His fireteam is the most diverse, with a
  Neophant, a Ursumari, an O'benn and an Oth, all of varying specialties. The
  O'benn and the Oth are the two named company members who are not from
  Earth. Carries a Strohl G/G 1000 sniper rifle and wears Blue Collar armor
  (which is standard for company grunts, too).

- **Kerchak "Orangus" Strongheart**, Rilla/Quartermaster/Infantry
  Grunt. Promoted to officer status when the gorilla in front of him got
  blown up. An enthusiastic Heavy Weapons Guy(rilla), he carries around a BH-209
  plasma cannon and wears a suit of USMF I-CC power armor. His fireteam is
  similarly all-Rillas, all-Heavies.

- **Leto "Master of Puppets"**, Ursumari/Medic/Crime Boss. Like Walter White,
  but a polar bear[^1]. Leto is a highly skilled medic and a surprisingly good
  liar. He also has a BH-209 plasgun, though his armor is a standard Blue Collar
  suit. His fireteam is made up of four identical pink-haired human women from
  the same clone family, all Medics, all named Joy. Yes, it's a Pokemon
  reference, but my mind immediately went to the Honokas of Sidonia[^2] (which are
  also clones, but fightier).

- **Rufuz Leet**, Purp/Ops Commander/Military Officer. Hails from a proud
  lineage of decorated soldiers, wields a G/G 511 carbine and wears an EX
  Supersuit, the most expensive suit of armor in the entire company. Completely
  ignores how much he looks like Master Chef from HALO[^3]. His fireteam is
  composed of three Purp Infantry named after actors from Expendables and one
  neophant named Babar who acts as the voice of wisdom in the unit. Fairly
  sneaky and skilled with nearly every weapon in the book.

All of them are very good at fighting in addition to being skilled at what their
command package implies. None of them have much in the way of social or mental
skills, with the exception of Leto who has Deception 8.

## Coming Up Next: The Damaxuri Deception

_Damaxuri Deception_ is the adventure that comes in the corebook, and it's
intended to be an introduction to both the game's mechanics and its philosophy
of adventure design. It laid out as a succession of scenes, each accompanied by
an estimate of how long it should take to run. I found that _extremely_ useful,
as it allowed me to direct my efforts somewhat to keep things moving as they
should and to better fit our limited 9:00-12:00 time slots.

We'll see how Skynet's Avengers handled this mission in the next post!


[^1]: So, Breaking Bear?
[^2]:
    {::nomarkdown}
    <figure>
      <img src="{{ "/assets/Honoka-Series.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
    </figure>
    {:/nomarkdown}

[^3]: Which is actually why Skynet hired him.
