---
layout: post
title: "To GURPS or Not To GURPS"
tags:
  - gurps
---

I'm sure many people have posted their takes on this over the years. In a
continuing attempt to procrastrinate on finishing the [Dragon's Dogma][1]
bestiary, I decided to post mine.

## My History with GURPS

GURPS has always been one of my favorite systems ever since I first heard of it
somewhere during the early Nineties. Back then, GURPS 3rd Edition was one of the
Big Three systems in Brazil, mostly because it was one of the three systems that
had been translated by this one publisher who had a strategy of buying All The
Licenses from US companies. The other two were AD&D 2nd Edition and Vampire: The
Masquerade, at the time also in its second edition.

Of those three, I went with GURPS, mostly by a process of elimination. Buying
only one core book was way cheaper than buying three, and I wasn't a fan of
vampires as player characters. I read and enjoyed the book, but didn't actually
use it in play very much. I mostly played Tagmar, which is a fantasy system that
should be pretty much unknown to anyone outside of Brazil, and later on a bit of
Shadowrun 2nd edition (and my relationship with _that_ one deserves an article
of its own).

After '96 or so, when my English skills had improved considerably and I had
moved to a bigger city with a proper FLGS, I began to discover the joy of GURPS
supplements. Some of them had been translated to Portuguese, but the ones I
found myself drawn to only had English versions. I still have and cherish my
physical copies of Russia, Callahan's Crosstime Saloon, the first Discworld, and
consider my relative recent finding of a used GURPS Goblins to be a major stroke
of luck. Even though I still didn't play much GURPS, the books were a joy to
read.

I bought the GURPS 4th Edition corebooks when they came out in
2005, in English. By then the Brazilian edition of the game had been languishing
for a while, publishing-wise: aside from those first few translated sourcebooks,
all we had were some locally-produced historical games based on GURPS Lite,
and even those were fading out of print by the time Fourth Edition rolled
around.

I liked the new core rules quite a lot, and kept buying print books as they came
out until I switched to PDF for good. These days, GURPS is pretty much my
absolute favorite system, though ironically that doesn't seem to be an opinion
shared with any of my fellow face-to-face players. But they've all moved into
board games anyway, so they don't count here.

Now, every time I watch or read some particularly interesting piece of media I
try to think what it would look like adapted to some RPG system. And pretty much
the first system I always try to fit in there is GURPS. 90% of the times the
result looks pretty good, at least for a 15-minute purely mental effort, but
sometimes I find it's not the best system for the job.

## When To GURPS

GURPS excells at representing settings and stories where the specific details of
the actions you take are _important_ and have _mechanical weight_. This usually
means relatively grounded and internally consistent settings, though not
necessarily _realistic_ ones. Most action movies fit here, as does a whole lot
of science fiction and quite a few martial arts stories.

Fantasy does, too, as long it has the traits above. IMHO, GURPS does
low-to-mid-level D&D a lot better than most actual editions of D&D. If you want
"I wait until the armored ogre lifts his arm to attack and stab his armpit with
my spear" to actually _mean_ something mechanically, GURPS is your system!

I would use GURPS for a game inspired in say, the _Killjoys_ science fiction
series, the _Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon_ movie, the _My Hero Academia_
comic, or the _Valkyria Chronicles_ video-game. I _have_ used GURPS for games
inspired on [X-COM][2] and plain old Dungeon Fantasy, and wrote a fairly
complete [Dragon's Dogma][1] adaptation.

In a more general note, GURPS also thrives when your group has a little time to
prepare for the game - choose which subset of the rules to use, create
characters, that sort of thing. The more of that the GM does themselves the less
experience with the system their players will need to have.

## When Not to GURPS

Now, the _other_ 10% of times, I find GURPS wouldn't be the best fit for the
show/book/video-game in question. These works usually have the opposite traits
from the ones I listed above: action details are _much_ less important than
their effects, and their settings tend to lack one of "grounded" or
"consistent". Often they lack both! This doesn't imply they're _bad_ works, just
that they have a different focus.

GURPS bases all of its numbers in real-world measurements. Powers have ranges in
yards or meters, an attack's damage is based on the force behind it, and so
on. Therefore, stories where characters have fuzzily-defined skills and powers
are hard to pin down. If your character's specific capabilities are defined more
by the needs of the story rather than by anything measurable in-world, it would
be best to use a system that supports this.

The sort of science fiction that has characters switch bodies a lot is also hard
to model in GURPS, whose rules assume its characters will usually not undergo
this sort of drastic change so often.

And if you _don't_ have much time to prepare for a game, the best system for it
will inevitably be whatever your players are more familiar with! At least where
I live, that's unlikely to be GURPS.

## What about you?

What have you used GURPS successfully for? If that game fit into my "When Not to
GURPS" description, what did you do to make it work well? Please leave a comment!

[1]: {{ "/projects/dragons-dogma" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/projects/gurps-xcom-reports/" | relative_url }}
