---
layout: post
title: "GURPS X-COM: Operation DARK JUDAS, Part 3"
tags:
  - gurps
  - x-com
  - actual-play
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/xcom__extraction_by_antimingebag-d9abdgp.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href=http://antimingebag.deviantart.com/art/XCOM-Extraction-561522409>
      Illustration by AntiMingebag on DeviantArt
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Welcome to another mission report for [GURPS X-COM: Noises in the Dark][0]! Our
characters for this mission are:

- **Kendall Fairbarn**: A paranoid hacker from the UK. Was completely convinced
  human society had been heavily infiltrated by shape-changing aliens... and it
  turned out he wasn't entirely wrong.
- **Minette Duvall**: A bomb-disposal expert from Southern France, Minette is
  also quite handy with a rifle. She's devoutly Catholic and swears a lot when
  faced with danger, which is all the time. Currently wounded and minding the
  Skyranger as an NPC.
- **Niu Yulan (AKA Julia Yulan)**: A former hostage negotiator from China, built
  without a template but approaching a shootier Face. Her innate kindness and
  empathy came in handy in several of the missions! Currently controlled by
  Minette's player.
- **Jack Choi**: A former police detective from Hong Kong, and a staunch
  adherent of the "kick down the door" school of policing despite his light
  frame.
- **Sam McCall**: A brave and burly former US Army Ranger, run by a new player.

## White Masks

In our [last post][1], Strike One approached a crashed UFO and found itself
witnessing a large firefight between unknown factions. They were too far away to
positively ID either of them, and so after a brief discussion on what to do
decided to sneak closer to get a better look.

Heading east while keeping to the cover of native vegetation, the squad
approached the former Samarco building currently occupied by the grey-clad
people they saw from afar. On the way they sneak past a couple of rusted, empty
containers which have been abandoned close to the edge of the woods. Turning a
corner on one of the containers, they almost bump into a Tree of Woe growing
flush against its wall! Taking care not to touch the tree, they observe the
building, now only 30m away.

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/crash-site.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
  Annotated map of the scene.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The squad recognizes its occupants as Puppets of Ruin from the way they move,
but their equipment is different from what they've seen so far. The grey outfits
are some sort of futuristic armor covering their whole bodies, with a white
faceless helmet or mask covering their faces and skulls.

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/white-mask.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
  <a href="http://www.deviantart.com/art/Noza-37340050"/>
    Kinda like this, but eyeless.
  </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Some of the puppets have painted ghastly smiles on their masks, but other than
that they're completely featureless. Their weapons are rifles capable of
automatic fire, with underbarrel semi-automatic grenade launchers. As for the
other side, they're still about as far away as they were before, so the PCs
can't ID them.

It takes about a minute for the squad to observe all of this, which is when they
notice one of the white-masked puppets stop shooting at the other party and
raise a hand to where its ear would be in a gesture not unlike that of an Agent
from _The Matrix_. It then looks directly at the party, despite there being no
way it would be able to spot them from its current position!

As that puppet begins to raise its weapon in the direction of the party, they
hear wet slapping sounds behind them, and turn to see that tree near the
container dropping another three-puppet fireteam! The newcomers are close enough
to attack with their swords, and they do just that.

Strike One is able to shoot them dead in short order, but the time it took for
them to do that was enough for the masked puppet to aim and fire its grenade
launcher, greatly damaging their cover and stripping the surrounding foliage
bare.

The squad elects to begin a fighting withdrawal through the woods back to the
north. Julia and Sam fire away at the "White Mask" as the others retreat, and
though they're pretty sure they managed to hit its center of mass several times,
it doesn't seem to react at all. The return fire sounds more like tearing silk
than gunfire. Several of the bullets hit Julia and chew through her trauma
plate, with at least one getting through and wounding her.

## Blue Mask

The PCs retreat behind one of the steel containers, and manage not to get shot
again even as White Masks' buddies join in on the fun. The shooting stops
momentarily when a titanic explosion erupts from somewhere to the south, and as
its roar subsides they can hear a faint whimper from within the neighboring
container. Choi and Kendall throw some smoke grenades to give them some
concealment, and then Choi and Julia move to investigate the other container.

Inside, they find an alien! They almost shoot it out of reflex, but stop when
they notice this one doesn't seem to be a combatant. Unlike the puppets, this
individual is 1.5m tall at most, wearing a skin-tight dark grey outfit and with
a skin or carapace of a very dark purple, two legs and four arms. Its face is
vaguely human, but it's a bright royal blue and has a prodigious nose
reminiscent of a crane's beak.

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/blue-mask.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
  Kinda like this.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The alien is huddled in close to the container's north end from where Julia and
Choi comes in, and as soon as it spots them it raises its two top arms and
shouts "Sparing us!". Julia lowers her weapon and manages to talk to the
creature, who becomes quite relieved when it sees the squad is friendly and that
they bear the X-COM insignia on their uniforms. It's apparently been looking for
them! It's obvious to the PCs that escorting this real live alien back to base
is now their top priority.

There isn't much time to talk, however, as three White Masks are quickly making
their way to the squad's position. Kendall pops more smoke in an attempt to
delay them, but the alien warns in its peculiar dialect that it doesn't
work. The squad begins retreating to the Skyranger with their new charge in a
tense game of cat and mouse with their three pursuers, which not only are better
equipped than the "newborn" puppets they've been facing but are also much more
tactically savvy. Their armor also seems to make them largely immune to even the
PC's assault rifles!

Choi then remembers the alien RPG they stashed a ways away, and runs ahead to
fetch it and lie in wait. Though they experience a couple of scary close calls,
the rest of the squad manages to lead the puppets to the trap and clear out
before Choi fires the surprisingly light alien launcher and obliterates the
three puppets.

With that done, there's no further obstacle between them and the Skyranger. They
strap themselves and the alien in, and take off, concluding the operation.

The spoilers and fight analysis for this operation deserve their own post, since
they would make this one run too long. And after that, we'll see what
consequences this operation had on the campaign's strategic layer.

[0]: {{ "/projects/gurps-xcom-reports/" | relative_url }}
[1]: {{ "/2017/04/29/dark-judas.html" | relative_url }}
