---
layout: post
title: "GURPS X-COM: Campaign Setup"
category: gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/xcom__extraction_by_antimingebag-d9abdgp.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href=http://antimingebag.deviantart.com/art/XCOM-Extraction-561522409>
      By AntiMingebag on DeviantArt
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The [big post-mortem][1] on the Noises in the Dark campaign setting seems to
have been relatively well-received, and I've been in search of subjects to talk
about, so I'm going to make that campaign A Thing here in Octopus Carnival. I'll
post a few more specific descriptions of my setup and play reports for the
actual field missions!

This will break up the blog's so far relentless stream of fantasy posts with
some modern articles, and give me something to write about that's easier to do
than coming up with stats for Dragon's Dogma Bestiary monsters. After all,
everything that's here already happened. I'm not sure I can post the GURPS stats
I made up for the Dreams of Ruin monsters or their environmental effects, but
pretty much everything else should be fair game. If you really want to see those
stats then [throw some money in Mr. Grabowski's direction][2] so the material
can be freed earlier!

In this post I'll try to expand a bit on the basic setup for the X-COM side of
the campaign, since that part is all me.

## Step One: Recruitment

This was a forum-based game on RPG.net, so the first thing I did was to put up a
recruitment thread. I laid out the basic premise of the game: it's GURPS X-COM,
with soldier PCs and occasional "strategic" interludes where the players
themselves made decisions for the organization. Prospective players should post
character concepts, and I would choose which ones would fill the group.

Recruitment was _not_ on a first-come, first-served basis, as I had been burned
in the past by doing that and ending up with one or more severely disrupting
players. The lot I got from this round of recruitment was pretty nice, though!

Two of them would end up bailing out from the game before their first
in-character post, but I wasn't too upset with that - it's pretty much the cost
of doing business in forum games. I always recruit a number of players slightly
higher than what I think I can easily handle for this reason.

Obviously if you're planning on replicating this campaign in a face to face
game, you wouldn't have this issue.

## Step Two: Choose Your Destiny

Once the initial group of players had been locked down, I presented them with a
series of decisions that would shape the campaign to come.

### Choose Your Enemy

As stated in the [post-mortem][1], this was a choice between the original alien
enemies of the X-COM games, and the Dreams of Ruin. There isn't much to say
about the former, as they weren't chosen and I never developed them beyond this
initial concept.

Choosing the Dreams meant that the initial incidents X-COM was created to
investigate had more to do with traditional horror stories about fairies and
witches than they did with classic UFO mythology. Strange things silhouetted
against the moon, people vanishing into the woods, and a particularly notable
incident where all the medical drugs stored in a hospital in Cologne went bad at
once for no readily apparent reason.

### Choose your Leaders

In response to this, a group of 36 nations founded the Council and pooled their
resources to form X-COM. The idea behind the Council is nice: the nations of
Earth gather together to repel a global threat! The reality is a little darker,
as despite all delegates theoretically having the same amount of decision power,
the richer members contribute with more money and see themselves as entitled to
more influence. The ruling elites of each country also simply cannot resist
using this clandestine military and intelligence organization to handle private
issues that have little to do with aliens.

These negative tendencies are greatly amplified by having the Dreams of Ruin as
the Enemy, since one of their main effects is to amplify negative emotions in
their affected area. From the start I planned to have the corruption in the
Council nations to play an important role in the story.

There were fierce debates among the Council members over who would be its
commanding officer. Sure, they all wanted someone who could get the job done,
but they were also looking out for the interests of their specific
nations. Finally it came down to two choices:

The first was "Mr. Fox", an American with a long list of shady black ops in his
curriculum, in places like the Middle East and the Balkans. He actually went
missing for years to get away from all that stuff, and they only managed to
bring him back because the fate of the world literally depended on it. He's
pretty much a Big Boss expy. He has a reputation of taking good care of his men,
recruiting the best and giving them top of the line training. The downside is
that a lot of Council members don't like him very much, and he has no time to
spare sucking up to them.

The second was "Mr. Smiley", a well-connected member of the British intelligence
community. He brings from that line of business the idea that human assets are
expendable if it means the success of the mission. As such, his agents are
individually less well-trained than Fox's would be, but there are more of
them. And his connections mean the Council loves him, in no small part because
he promises to look out for several of its member nations' private interests. He
is, of course, a George Smiley expy.

In game terms, the players were given the chance to vote for one of the two
candidates. Choosing Fox meant the PCs would be built on 250 points, and would
get extensive drone and robot support once that became available in the tech
tree. It also meant that X-COM would eventually have a nasty falling out with
the Council, due to his inability to stay on good terms with them by playing
along with the corruption present there. As they would still be the only ones
with any real chance against the threat, they would be forced to go rogue.

Choosing Smiley meant that the PCs would be built on 150 points, and would be
part of a larger unit with several other NPCs. The opposition wouldn't get any
weaker, which meant that unit would almost certainly face significant casualties
when it fought the aliens. Some of their missions wouldn't involve aliens at
all, but would instead be about doing dirty jobs for one member nation or
another. This X-COM would be very well-funded, but less effective at combating
the Dreams. The "big falling out" here would ideally be between the PCs and the
organization.

Whatever commander they chose would lead X-COM, and the other would vanish from
the game... or so the players thought. The commander they _didn't_ choose would
go on to form a rogue organization that would make an appearance later. Yes,
this would be a version of EXALT from the 2012 computer game. Or rather,
X-ALT. The hyphens are important!

They chose Mr. Fox, which meant Mr. Smiley went into the cold to form his black
ops squad in the service of those corrupt special interests in the Council
nations. This makes X-ALT a "bad guy" faction.

### Choose Your Science

The players were similarly given three choices of Lead Scientist for X-COM:
Dr. Moira Vahlen, Dr. Raymond Shen, and Dr. Yuri Sokolov.

The first two were taken straight from the 2012 computer game. Here, Vahlen is a
German doctor and particularly skilled in the biological sciences. Shen is a
Chinese engineer and skilled in robotics. Sokolov, the original character, is a
Russian and also a doctor, but his main area of interest is paranormal
research - no one alive knows more about all those weird Soviet psychic research
programs than him.

Any of the three would be equally adept at leading X-COM's research efforts, and
their different areas of expertise translated into different "free" starting
technologies as the new lead scientist used the organization's resources to turn
their previous research into something useful in fighting aliens. Vahlen would
give them advanced medkits; Shen would give them flying scout drones.

They chose Sokolov, who was a bit of a special case. He spends that time
convincing his colleagues that he's not a useless crackpot, so there's no
bonus tech... but he turns out to be just perfect for leading research into
Alien Crazy, which in this case means _magic_.

Unlike the choice of commander, all three scientists are part of the team
regardless, along with a number of other nameless NPCs - this is just to decide
who calls the shots.

## Step Three: Hurry Up and Wait

With all the choices made, X-COM installed itself in its brand new underground
base in the remodeled Cheyenne Mountain complex, and began scanning the skies
for the alien menace... only to find nothing for a whole month. At the end of
that month something remarkable happened, but I'll leave that for the next post
on this subject. Stay tuned!

[1]: {{ "/gurps/2017/01/03/x-com-post-mortem.html" | absolute_url }}
[2]: https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/152691/The-Dreams-of-Ruin
