---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma Bestiary: The Undead"
category: gurps
tags:
  - gurps
  - dragons-dogma
  - bestiary
---

This is the sixth post of a series converting Dragon's Dogma enemies to
**GURPS**. Previous posts can be found below:

- [Humans][1]
- [Goblins][2]
- [Wolves][3]
- [Saurians][4]
- [Harpies][5]

In Gransys, the word "undead" applies to those walking corpses more commonly
known as _zombies_ in other media, but here we use it in the more traditional
Dungeon Fantasy sense to encompass all sorts of horrors from the grave. Undead
make up a large enemy subtype that remains relevant all through the original
game, so any discussion of them necessarily involves spoilers.

Undead in Gransys are generally similar to those found in countless other
fantasy settings. They infest any place that has seen a great deal of death and
not much in the way of ritual purification, or where dark forces are actively at
work. Since many dungeons fall into both categories, they tend to have a lot of
undead.

These creatures tend to be more active at night, and while it's common to find
large groups of undead they rarely cooperate with other types of monster, which
they view as targets just like any other living creature. In large dungeons,
undead and living monsters tend to have distinct territories and keep to them,
with the occasional fight redefining their borders.

## Zombies

There's little to say about the zombies of Gransys that hasn't been said a
thousand times elsewhere. They're slow, they moan a lot, they come in large
numbers and they like holding you down and biting you to death. The Horde
Zombies from **GURPS Dungeon Fantasy 2** and the Servitor Zombie from **DF 9**
should do nicely to represent the bulk of them. Of note is that Gransys zombies
are usually _not_ infectious. They rise because of necromancy, ambient dark
magic, or divine curse, not a plague. Of course, an industrious coven of
necromancers could still get a zombie infestation going by doing all the
animating themselves.

Interesting zombie variations include:

- Zombie Warrior: Increase ST and give them skill equal to DX with a
  weapon. Give them a suit of armor and a weapon covered by the skill.

- Giant zombie: _Double_ ST, increase SM to +1, and add Resistant to Turning
  (+3).

## Skeletons

Common skeletons are little more than faster, more fragile zombies, but they get
interesting rather quickly. Like zombies, they don't keep any of the original
person's memories or personality, but they do often retain their skills!
Skeletons that rise from old battlefields tend to be skilled soldiers. Old
temples and mage towers will often contain skeleton _wizards_. None of them can
improve on these skills after death, but if a 400-point delver falls in the
depths of a death-tainted dungeon, they're likely to become terrible monsters.

Basic skeletons were commoners in life, and follow the Servitor Skeleton
template from **DF 9** without any weapons or other equipment. For more
dangerous specimens, create a human opponent and apply the Servitor Skeleton
modifiers as a racial template. Using some of the ready-made
opposition [here][1] works, but unique high-point skeletons also exist.

## Ghosts

Ghosts are incorporeal undead that resemble spheres of eerie light. They tend to
appear at night over bodies of water, but some may also appear in drier settings
if they died there. In either case, ghosts never stray too far from the site of
their death. Ghosts attack by "entering" a victim and slowly draining their
life. This is erroneously referred to as possession by the inhabitants of
Gransys, but the victim is still in control of their actions while this goes on.

Physical attacks pass harmlessly through these creatures, but spells affect them
normally. Properly fighting them requires a magician with the right spells -
Affect Spirits or "pure energy" attack spells like Fireball or Sunbolt. A group
that lacks any of this is reduced to running and hoping they get far enough away
from the creature's territory before they succumb to it

**ST** --; **DX** 12; **IQ** 6; **HT** 10

**SM** -1; **Dodge** 8; **DR** 0;

**HP** 10; **Will** 12; **Per** 10; **FP** 10

**Basic Speed** 5.5; **Move** 10 (flight with Hover).

- **Drain Life (12 vs. Will)**: Causes injury equal to the margin of
  victory. Cosmic, ignores DR. If the ghost is wounded, it heals the same amount
  of HP. The ghost must touch the victim to use this attack.

**Traits**: Flight;  Insubstantial (not vs. Magic);  Immunity to Metabolic
Hazards; Injury Tolerance (No Blood, No Brain, No Neck, No Vitals, Homogenous);
Fragile (Unnatural); No Manipulators; Divine Curse (must stay within 20m of
place of death), Supernatural Features (Glows).

**Class**: Undead.

## Wights and Liches

The prime example of sapient undead in Gransys, these are powerful spellcasters
who used forbidden magic to turn themselves into immortal undead. They retain
their memories and personality and can keep on improving in their craft after
the transformation. The difference between a wight and a lich is one of degree,
not of kind - a wight is simply a lich who's still relatively new to the
business.

For both, use the Lich from **Dungeon Fantasy Monsters 1** as a starting
point. Wights generally have less of everything that makes a Lich dangerous:
spells, Magery, IQ, resources and minions. Proper liches use the published
stats.

A note on the Unkillable trait: this is a big feature of the published Lich, but
the video game doesn't seem to ascribe anything like this to its version of them
aside from the tendency all monsters there have of respawning after a while. The
easiest way to translate this would be to split the difference and say Wights
don't possess the Trait, as they've yet to master the trick to it. As variant
mana levels are very rare in Gransys, it could make sense to have liches use the
more traditional philactery instead.

A lich that has a philactery as its weakness still has Unkillable 3: to kill
such a creature, both the philactery and its current body must be destroyed. If
the PCs somehow manage to deal with the philactery first, they must still
contend with the Lich, and do so before it has time to make another philactery
to kill it for good.

[1]: {{ "/gurps/2016/12/07/human-enemies.html" | absolute_url }}
[2]: {{ "/gurps/2016/12/14/goblins.html" | absolute_url }}
[3]: {{ "/gurps/2016/12/17/wolves.html" | absolute_url }}
[4]: {{ "/gurps/2016/12/27/saurians.html" | absolute_url }}
[5]: {{ "/gurps/2017/01/06/harpies.html" | absolute_url }}
