---
layout: post
title: "Fey Gnomes in Dungeon Fantasy"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - dfrpg
    - race
---

Until relatively recently, Gnomes were kinda like the Ugly Ducklings of the
small folk when it comes to games in the dungeon fantasy genre. In my
experience, Halflings have always been the tiny sneak-thieves[^1] and dwarves
the stocky, bearded axe murderers. Gnomes, on the other hand, just felt like a
somewhat bland blend of dwarven and halfling traits.

Over time, as authors began to cast about for a stronger niche for them, I began
to see a couple of different varieties. One of the most famous is the _tinker
gnome_, whose shtick is being good at messing with "advanced" technology like
clockwork mechanisms or steam engines. The Dragonlance setting takes this to an
extreme by making them pint-sized mad scientists, and the world of Warcraft
takes a similar tack. The gnome racial template present in both GURPS Dungeon
Fantasy and the DFRPG is a less extreme version of this type, having access to a
Talent that makes them good at dealing with locks, traps and making things like
crossbows.

The other famous gnomish niche is the _fey trickster_. Gnomes of this type
usually prefer the same type of forest that houses faeries and nymphs, can use a
bit of innate magic, and have other stats conductive to becoming good magic
users. Recent editions of D&D usually go with this type of gnome in most
settings that aren't Dragonlance, and Pathfinder follows suit.

If you want to play this type of gnome in your Dungeon Fantasy game, this racial
template will help you!

## Fey Gnome

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/forest-gnome.jpg" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption><a
  href="http://zelulae.tumblr.com/post/158872841261/i-havent-posted-anything-in-a-while-so-have-this">Illustration
  by Zelulae</a></figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

**Racial Cost**: 0 points

Fey Gnomes are about as big as halflings, but no one would confuse the two. With
their slim builds, pointy ears, large eyes and wildly-colored hair they look
more like tiny psychedelic elves. Tough they are mortal, these gnomes still have
a strong connection to the faerie realm, which manifests in their natural talent
for magic and their predilection for whimsy and pranks.

In Golarion (Pathfinder's setting), these gnomes were native to an otherworldly
faerie realm, and were kicked out of it in the distant past. They never quite
adapted to mortal life, and to this day have some trouble relating to other
peoples or settling down.

In other settings, most Fey Gnomes might still live in those realms, or visit
them regularly! Gnomish communities would be more common here, and would rely
heavily on illusion magic to protect themselves.

**Attribute Modifiers**: ST-3 {-30}; IQ+1 {20}; HT+1 {10}.

**Secondary Characteristic Modifiers**: SM -2; HP+1 {2}; Basic Move -1 {-5}.

**Advantages**: Magery 0 {5}; Night Vision 5 {5}; Gnome Magic {3}.

**Disadvantages**: Impulsiveness (12) {-10}.

**Features**: Wild, brightly colored hair and/or dark eyes without pupils.

### Special Gnome Traits

#### Gnome Magic[^2]

You may learn up to three _wizardly_ or _druidic_ spells without regard for
pre-requisites! You must specify which spells those are during character
creation, though you can wait to actually learn them later if you wish. You must
still pay points to learn the spells as normal. If your Magery is 1 or more, it
gives a bonus to these spells (even if they are druidic).

The spells don't all have to be from the same "power source" - you can choose
one wizardly and two druidic spells, or any other combination. Your choice is
subject to GM approval. Popular spells for gnomes include Apportation, Sound,
Light, Beast Speech, Invisibility or other illusions.

[^1]: Furry feet are optional, but equally iconic.
[^2]: GURPS Stats: This is identical to the Leprechaun Charms perks possessed by
    that race in DF 3: The Next Level.

[1]: {{ "/projects/pathfinder-iconics" | relative_url }}
