---
layout: post
title: "GURPS X-COM: Operation DARK JUDAS, Part 2"
tags:
  - gurps
  - x-com
  - actual-play
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/xcom__extraction_by_antimingebag-d9abdgp.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href=http://antimingebag.deviantart.com/art/XCOM-Extraction-561522409>
      Illustration by AntiMingebag on DeviantArt
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Welcome to another mission report for [GURPS X-COM: Noises in the Dark][0]! Our
characters for this mission are:

- **Kendall Fairbarn**: A paranoid hacker from the UK. Was completely convinced
  human society had been heavily infiltrated by shape-changing aliens... and it
  turned out he wasn't entirely wrong.
- **Minette Duvall**: A bomb-disposal expert from Southern France, Minette is
  also quite handy with a rifle. She's devoutly Catholic and swears a lot when
  faced with danger, which is all the time. Currently wounded and minding the
  Skyranger as an NPC.
- **Niu Yulan (AKA Julia Yulan)**: A former hostage negotiator from China, built
  without a template but approaching a shootier Face. Her innate kindness and
  empathy came in handy in several of the missions! Currently controlled by
  Minette's player.
- **Jack Choi**: A former police detective from Hong Kong, and a staunch
  adherent of the "kick down the door" school of policing despite his light
  frame.
- **Sam McCall**: A brave and burly former US Army Ranger, run by a new player.

## Puppet Theater

In the [previous post][1], we saw how Strike One had a rough landing in the
blighted iron mine that comprises their Area of Operations. That firefight left
Minette wounded, so she decided to stay behind to help guard the Skyranger. The
rest of the squad pushed forward, going through the abandoned security
checkpoint to the west of their landing zone and then south following the road.

The 2.5km along the road to the crash site wouldn't be a significant obstacle to
this squad, but it would be a long enough stretch of time and space that I
decided a random encounter roll was appropriate. Yes, a random encounter! The
Dreams of Ruin _are_ from a book written for old-school D&D, and I couldn't let
all those wonderful tables to go waste! The level of Dream activity around here
meant I had to use the "Edge of the Forest" tables, and as for the result...

About halfway through the trek, they spot a particularly large Black Tree
growing on the middle of the road. Around it was a large group of puppets,
prostrating and contorting themselves as if in worship. That it was Christmas
Eve in the real world when this happened was entirely a coincidence! This was an
instance of "Puppet Theater", which is just what it sounds like: the Puppets of
Ruin put on spooky displays in places where an unwary traveler might watch
them. Why? Only they know.

Like all the other trees, this one had human bones scattered around its roots,
and this particular bunch of puppets had left their weapons in a pile
nearby. After some discussion, the squad decides to sneak through the woods at
the edge of the road, get as close as they can and open up with Sam's grenade
launcher followed by rifle fire. The plan goes off without a hitch and they
manage to take all the puppets out before they can react. I messed up a bit
here, since the explosion did damage the trees and this should have caused
another wave of battle-ready puppets to drop, but by this point I just wanted to
move forward and get to the main set piece.

I did make sure to point out the pile of shiny, intact alien weapons just lying
there, which made the PCs a bit paranoid. They checked around it, poked them a
bit, and came to the conclusion that there was no booby trap or anything - the
weapons were indeed just lying there. In truth, the Forest in that region kinda
_wanted_ them to take the weapons. It was an attempt to win them over, sort of,
and of course carrying these things elsewhere would also spread spores.

The squad proceeds to take one of each weapon, but instead of trying them out
they stash the lot in the nearby woods and blow the rest up with a grenade,
treating them more as samples to take home than new equipment. On the one hand,
good on them for resisting this temptation! On the other, they're sure going to
miss that RPG launcher in the next scene...

## Visage of Ruin

The squad proceeds along the road, and passes by one of the huge reservoirs that
were used to store mine tailings for processing. It's basically a huge pit dug
into the earth and shored up by dams where needed. This one is 1km from north to
south and 500m from east to west, and though it's not the one whose dams burst
it still presents a horrifying sight.

The floor of the pit is grayish brown and scarred by the toxic sludge that was
regularly dumped in it. A little of that sludge still pools at its southern end,
making a shore of sorts. The scale of the thing makes it hard for the PCs to not
stop and stare, and that of course is when they notice the trees. The anomaly in
there was so strong that even Strike One, inured as it was to the effect, took a
while to pierce it. The whole pit is teeming with Trees of Woe, and they look
right at home rising out of the toxic ground. It's a disquieting sight, but
there's nothing they can do about it now.

Continuing on, the squad spots a building at the end of the road. From about a
hundred meters away, it looks like it was originally a fairly practical
structure, single-story, brick walls and metal roof. It's been defaced in a
manner similar but more deliberate to that of the buildings in Cologne. All the
windows are broken, alien graffiti covers the walls, and there's this ropy white
stuff hanging everywhere. That's Bakegumo webbing, but the PCs didn't know it at
the time.

They're close to the crash site not, but don't have eyes on it yet, as it's
still a small distance to the southeast and currently obscured by
vegetation. They do hear gunfire and explosions coming from that direction, and
after some quick discussion on what to do decide to sneak east through the woods
to take a closer look at the situation.

Traversing the dense subtropical vegetation is difficult, but thankfully it's
all Earth-native. They get through and to see a large open landscaped area,
ringed with fancier looking (but also defaced) buildings and criss-crossed by
roads. The crashed alien craft is right in the middle of a small roundabout in
the center of the area, and it looks like... a house. It's built in a style
that's a cross between a Chinese junk and a miniature Taj Mahal, but it's
clearly a house, and it's still somewhat intact despite crashing. Since the
craft is about eighty meters away from the squad they can't see much more
detail, but there are definitely people in it, human-looking, wearing
white-sleeved clothes, having a firefight with the occupants of a building 70m
to the east of the squad. _Those_ people wear gray.

Now that's an interesting situation! Who are these two sides? Can the squad
trust any of them? What the heck is going on here? Find out on the next
installment!
