---
layout: post
title: "Eberron Changelings for Dungeon Fantasy"
tags:
  - gurps
  - dungeon-fantasy
---

The Doppelganger is a particularly unnerving D&D monster, not because of its
direct combat power but because of its ability to look like _anyone_. Adventures
involving them tend to be the urban, intrigue-filled kind where you never know
who's on your side and who's been secretly replaced by a monster.

Eberron was the first setting to give that ability to a playable character race!
As a Changeling, you get to enjoy the ability to look like anyone... and to be
the target of a lot of prejudice from people who assume you're secretly
replacing innocent victims, even if you're the most saintly of paladins. With
the racial template in this article, you get to do those things in either
version of the Dungeon Fantasy game.

## Changelings

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/changelings.png" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2009 WotC</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

**Racial Cost: 25 points**

Changelings are humanoids capable of altering their appearance at will. The
story of their origin varies depending on who you ask. Some say "Changeling" is
just a more polite way to call a Doppelganger. Some say the Changelings are the
offspring of a human and a _true_ Doppelganger, who is much more dangerous. The
truth depends on which edition of D&D you're stealing from.

A changeling's basic appearance is that of a slender, pale-skinned,
androgynous humanoid with large sunken eyes and an almost non-existent
nose. They can quickly change to look like any humanoid of similar size and
mass.

Changelings have no society of their own, and tend to live among humans. Their
abilities tend to give rise to lots of terrible stories about, well,
Doppelgangers, so most assume a "secret identity" in order to live peaceful
lives. Some have several, in order to have a backup in case one of their covers
is blown... and those who get too paranoid end up lending truth to those
terrible stories.

In times of changeling-fueled intrigue, gnomes and halflings are prized as
counter-intelligence agents. Members of both races tend to be quite crafty
themselves, and can't be replaced by changelings due to their small size.

**Advantages**: Changeling Shapeshifting {20}; Charisma 1 {5};
Night Vision 5 {5}.

**Disadvantages**: Terrible Secret {-5}.

### Special Changeling Traits

#### Changeling Shapeshifting[^1]

By concentrating for 10 seconds, you can assume the form of any humanoid with
the same Size Modifier as you (0). Your weight remains the same and you don't
gain any abilities with game effects posessed by that type of humanoid (but see
below). You do, however, retain your other racial advantages. Your clothing and
possessions don't change with you.

The Appearance and Honest Face advantages work differently for you. Instead of
applying to your _natural_ form, they allow you to assume humanoid forms that
possess these advantages. In the case of Appearance, consider the level you pay
for to be the _maximum_ you can transform into. You can also take on less
good-looking forms for no extra cost. You can't take Appearance as a
disadvantage, but changing into uglier forms doesn't cost extra (or give you
points!).

This power is of obvious use in **Disguise** attempts. When using this skill,
you never require any tool more elaborate than a change of clothes, and need at
most 5 minutes of preparation instead of the 30 required by others. You also
never suffer penalties for race-crossing or trying to disguise yourself as
someone "very different". Copying the appearance of a specific person always
requires a **Disguise** roll.

#### Terrible Secret[^2]

"Civilized" society considers you a monster, but you are usually able to hide
your true nature. The GM rolls 3d every time you go to town or start a session
there. On a 6 or less, your cover is blown and you suffer the effects of Social
Stigma (Savage) - including another immediate 3d roll to see if you're kicked
out of town! This lasts until you can re-establish your cover. How you can do
that is up to the GM. It could range from a few skill rolls to a full adventure!

### Optional Traits

Changelings can always buy the Disguise and Acting skills even if those aren't
part of their professional template. Even honest changelings often need these
skills to escape persecution.

### Changeling Characters

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/arthur_wolfheart__s_party_by_hangemhigh13.jpg" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption><a href="https://hangemhigh13.deviantart.com/art/Arthur-Wolfheart-s-Party-138578618">Any of these could be a changeling!</a></figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Changelings often become delvers - it's the only line of work where they don't
look much weirder than their colleagues. They do particularly well as Bards and
Thieves! Even on the pure dungeon-crawling campaigns assumed by the default
Dungeon Fantasy setup, their shape-changing ability can eliminate some reaction
penalties from humanoid monsters if the character has time to prepare for the
encounter ("You can trust me, I'm an orc too."). They could also infiltrate a
group of such monsters and gather precious information about the enemy. In
campaigns with more social interaction or even intrigue, their utility
skyrockets.

Changeling names tend to be short, unisex affairs: Qin, Kell, Tan, and so
on. Most go by a pseudonym when in their cover identities, and some just are
just given names from the society where they grew up from the start. Most
changelings tend to think of themselves as being whatever gender matches their
current form, though some do have a stronger preference for a single identity.

[^1]: GURPS Stats: This is Morph (Cosmetic -50%; Mass Conservation -20%; Retains
    Shape -20%). The maximum cost reduction from limitations is -80%, so it
    costs 20 points.

[^2]: GURPS Stats: This is a -5 point Secret that converts into Social Stigma
    (Savage) when revealed. Since your cover can be re-established, the
    disadvantage doesn't change in value while the Secret is out.
