---
layout: post
title: "Mooks & Minions in GURPS: Octopus Carnival Edition"
category: gurps
tags:
  - gurps
---

Octopus Carnival is back from is hiatus! I'll resume my writing here with an
article that's not directly related to any of my ongoing projects. One goes
where inspiration strikes, after all.

Inspiration in this case came from [this post][1] from Peter V. Dell'Orto over
at Dungeon Fantastic, about how the mook rules he uses on his Dungeon Fantasy
campaign. That got me thinking about the several different iteration of these
rules present both in GURPS itself and on other systems. In this article I'll
talk a bit about those and introduce a variation on them that I'll likely use
for my own games.

## Minions With Many Names

Mooks, Minions, Extras... by now the concept of them is probably well-known to
most roleplayers, as a bunch of RPG systems has been codifying the concept for
decades now. Since every game has a different name for this rule and I don't
want to keep listing them all, I'll use the name "Minions" in this article.

Simply put, minions are weak enemies that pose little threat to player
characters individually, and who are present in the game mostly to show case how
competent said PCs are. They have simplified statistics and usually go down with
one good hit from a PC. They take inspiration from a long line of action and
adventure movies, where it's common for the badass protagonists to mow through a
large group of minions over the course of an action scene, or on the way to
fighting a tough, named foe. They also tend to feature heavily in chase scenes,
where their narrative purpose is to crash and burn with every maneuver the hero
pulls off to confound them.

The _concept_ of minions has been around since the early days of D&D and its
hordes of low-HD enemies pitted against mid- or high-level parties. The first
time I saw it explicitly named and codified was with Exalted and its rules for
Extras, though it almost certainly wasn't the first system to do so. Many others
tried their hand at it, including D&D 4th Edition with its Minion rules.

GURPS itself multiple sets of minion rules. In the core book, each minion is an
individual opponent: they always go down in one hit, and they never use Active
Defenses (but also never All-Out-Attack either). **GURPS Action** and **GURPS
Dungeon Fantasy** toughen them up a bit by allowing active defenses and allowing
for several different grades of opposition. _Swarms_ are large groups of
"minions" treated like a single, abstract creature, and again we have a version
in the **Basic Set** and a couple more elaborate ones in **Dungeon Fantasy** and
other sources. I'm sure people have come up with their own variations as
well. So here's mine! It's focused on distinct individuals rather than on
swarms. For now, I'll use the standard published rules for those.

## Octopus Opposition

This is how I intend to grade my opposition from now on, from weakest to
strongest. The system takes inspiration from the existing GURPS rules, and also
from the several different grades of opposition presented by D&D 4th Edition and
early Shadowrun (with its Professional Levels).

Please note that this system is most appropriate for cinematic games that follow
at least _some_ "action movie" conventions regardless of their point
level. Grimly realistic games should stick to the **Basic Set** rules (which are
the equivalent of making all enemies Elite under this system). Campaigns that
sit somewhere in the middle could ellide the lower opposition grades and make
everyone at least a Worthy.

While higher-grade opposition is _usually_ more skilled at fighting
than lower-grade foes, its final grade is as much a matter of narrative
importance as of pure power. In a campaign following action-movie narrative
rules, you are more likely to find higher-grade enemies the closer you are to
the story's climax, or to your mission objective. Named NPCs are also more
likely to be of a higher grade than the troops they command even if they are
equally skilled, because the GM usually wants the NPC to stick around for a bit
longer and be memorable.

This also means that it's perfectly possible for a given individual to move
between these grades depending on the circumstances of the story. That one lucky
goblin minion that managed to inflict significant damage on the party and escape
without a scratch might return as a worthy or better at a latter date if the
players become obsessed with defeating it. In the case of Horde Ninjas, this
progression could happen over the course of a single fight!

Belonging to a specific grade is always a "campaign feature" and as such never
costs or gives points.

### Minions

Minions are the equivalent of fodder in **Dungeon Fantasy** or **Action**. They
fight and defend themselves normally, but it only takes a single point of damage
getting past their DR to bring them down. This doesn't necessarily represent
killing. A "downed" minion might be unconscious, wounded, or even actively
fleeing! Whatever happens, though, they _are_ 100% out of the fight at that
point. Obviously, it's still possible to interact with a defeated minion who is
still alive after the fight.

While minions can theoretically have very high skill levels and fight with fancy
techniques, they usually don't. They tend to come in large numbers and their
tactics leverage that. This grade is appropriate for those goblin and dinoman
hordes, cheap hired thugs, or the regular forces of the evil Star Empire. Any
monster called out as fodder in official materials would be a minion under this
system.

### Tough Minions

Also known as "purple" minions for entirely jocular reasons. They're like
regular minions, but a little more ornery. A tough minion has an HP total like a
normal character, but always fails combat-related HT rolls. This means that any
hit that forces a "Knockdown and Stunning" roll will take them out, as will
reaching 0 HP or less. They can take a few scratches and keep going, but a solid
hit still breaks them. These are basically Petter V. Dell'Orto's fodder
monsters, though they never recover from stunning before the fight ends. They do
recover in time afterwards, of course.

This grade is appropriate for pretty much the same types of foe as normal
minions in those cases where the GM wants to make things a bit more challenging,
or when the group in question has a reputation for strength but the GM doesn't
want them to steal the scene. They're your goblin veterans, experienced
mobsters, or those Imperial soldiers with the black armor that talk in sinister
coded radio transmissions.

### Worthies

Worthies are the "standard" level of opposition. They defend themselves
normally, including making HT rolls to avoid and recover from knockdown and
stunning, but go down once they reach 0 HP or less. They're a significant
obstacle, but you still don't want them to stick around _too_ long. The same
examples listed for Tough Minions also make suitable worthies, as does any
monster from the books not specifically listed as fodder.

Worthies still tend to come in groups, though these will be smaller than groups
of minions. A movie fight against five or six opponents who keep getting back up
after being hit is employing worthies instead of minions! Note that this doesn't
mean worthies are necessarily low-skill opponents. At this level, there is no
inconsistency whathosever in making them as skilled as the PCs themselves.

### Elites

Elite enemies are treated just like PCs. They make full use of all of the
campaign's combat rules. When they reach 0 HP or less, they'll keep making HT
rolls to stay conscious and alive, and might fight to the death if they think
it's warranted. When they don't, retreating is always their own decision rather
than something the rules force them to do. Elites are almost always named NPCs
with their own personalities and motivations. They are rarely less skilled than
the PCs themselves, and are often better. A fight against such an opponent
usually marks an important plot milestone in adventures following movie logic.

Any enemy from the books who is supposed to still pose a threat when under 0 HP
is probably an Elite. Boss Monsters from **Dungeon Fantasy** also fit here -
they are usually more _powerful_ in terms of statistics, but they receive the
same level of plot protection as the PCs.

### Special

Every category system needs a catch-all! Special opposition has something that
gives it even _more_ narrative protection than the PCs, or that makes it not
quite fit in the ranking system above. Colossi with multiple parts that must be
destroyed in order? Multi-stage bosses that switch character sheets entirely
when defeated?  Anything goes!

[1]: https://dungeonfantastic.blogspot.com.br/2013/05/my-modified-df-mook-rule.html
