---
layout: post
title: "GURPS X-COM: The Arsenal of Ruin, Part 2"
tags:
  - gurps
  - x-com
  - gear
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/xcom__extraction_by_antimingebag-d9abdgp.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href=http://antimingebag.deviantart.com/art/XCOM-Extraction-561522409>
      Illustration by AntiMingebag on DeviantArt
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

In their second field-op, our brave [X-COM squad][1] saw new enemies with new
equipment, so it's time to update the Arsenal of Ruin! This post will focus on
the gear carried by the Elite Puppets, also known as White Masks.

## White Mask Gear ##

White Masks are elite Puppets of Ruin in service to the Ebon Masters. Like their
"lesser" brethren, they are borne as fruit from the Trees of Ruin, but they only
appear in the heart of the woods where the Trees of Woe are older. At the stage
where our campaign stopped, there were still no trees old enough to drop elite
puppets, so the ones the party met are all "imported" from off-world.

In the original Dreams of Ruin material, elite puppets carried TL 8 military
equipment equivalent to that of a first-world military soldier: automatic
assault rifles and more modern rocket launchers. For this campaign, they had to
step up their game, as that sort of gear is starting equipment for my PCs.

Like the [equipment carried by normal puppets][2], all of this gear is produced
by the trees themselves along with the puppet that wears it. The only "custom"
addition by the Ebon Masters here is painting the masks on their armors white to
denote rank within their organization. This equipment is meant to be more
advanced than anything carried by modern Earth infantry, but it's still
considered somewhat cheap and low-end by the aliens.

### Puppet Assault Rifle  ###

Compared to the standard-issue puppet rifle seen in [Part 1][2], this bullpup
design fires a lighter 7mm round at a much higher rate of fire. It has an
electrothermal-chemical (ETC) action and uses the High-Cyclic Controlled Bursts
rule from **High-Tech**, p. 83.

This weapon also has an integral underbarrel grenade launcher that fires 25mm
rounds with greater force and accuracy than its TL 8 counterparts.

The Puppet Assault Rifle lacks any targetting electronics, as the puppet's
supernatural senses fill the same role. It is otherwise extremely reliable and
easy to operate, being able to work for years in adverse conditions without
regular maintenance. It is operated with Guns (Longarm), or with Guns (Rifle)
and Guns (Grenade Launcher) under the standard rules.

| TL | Weapon       | Damage  | Acc | Range    | Weight | RoF | Shots |ST  | Bulk | Rcl |
|:--:|:------------:|:-------:|:---:|:--------:|:------:|:---:|:-----:|:--:|:----:|:---:|
| 9  | Puppet Assault Rifle | 7d pi | 4   | 1100/4500 | 3.5/0.5 | 9#   | 50+1(3) | 9  | -4| 1   |
|    | _Grenade Launcher_ | 4d pi++ or as grenade | 4 | 360/2200 | -- | 1 | 3(3) | -- | -- | 1 |

<br/> The weapon is usually loaded with standard ammunition (in table), but it's
perfectly capable of firing APDS (9d(2) pi-) or APEP (7d(3) pi-) rounds. Both
are would ruin the day of those players who think their vests-with-plates make
them immune to puppet weaponry. Even without armor-piercing ammo, they're still
smart enough to aim for the arms and legs if they notice center-of-mass shots
don't result in an immediate kill.

The grenade launcher is usually loaded with TL9 HE or thermobaric warheads
(**Ultra-Tech** p. 153 and 155), though the Ebon Masters can certainly issue
crueler and/or higher-TL loads to their servants if the mission calls for it.

### White Mask Armor ###

The White Mask Armor suit covers the torso and head in rigid plates of the same
composite material used to make puppet swords. The neck and limbs are covered in
a mesh of ultra-tech ballistic fibers equivalent to Reflex armor (from
**Ultra-Tech**). All of this material is colored a dull gray, except for the
helmet plates, which are white.

The suit is sealed, chemically-coated and contamination-proof, but does _not_
feature ports for air tanks or even a visor, as its intended wearers have no
need for such things. In fact, it can't even be removed from the puppet wearing
it without being cut open.

The White Mask Armor provides DR 30 to the torso, groin and head. It provides DR
20 against cutting and piercing damage and DR 10 against all other damage types
to the limbs and neck. While DR 30 is a little less than the DR 35 provided by a
TL 8 assault vest with trauma plates, this DR is _not_ semi-ablative like that
of the plates, and is more than enough to stop rounds from an X-COM issue
assault rifle. The full suit is also about a bit lighter than the starting
"heavy armor" package for PCs and provides more DR to all non-torso locations.

| TL | Name | Location | DR | Weight |
|:--:|:----:|:--------:|:--:|:------:|
|  9 | White Mask Armor | torso, groin, head| 30 | 15kg |
|    |                  | arms, legs, neck | 20/10 |   |

<br/>

## Using White Mask Gear ##

Each Elite Puppet wears a White Mask Armor suit, and carries a Puppet Assault
Rifle with 4 reloads for the rifle and 2 for the grenade launcher. They also
each carry a sword and a couple of hand grenades, and may carry a Puppet RPG or
extra rounds for one carried by a squadmate. These items are described
in [Part 1][2].

These weapons also fall within the "second tier" of my tech tree. Researching
these weapons would have allowed X-COM to make similar versions for themselves,
which would have the advantage of not being tainted by spores. They never did
get a "researchable" White Mask corpse, but if they had they could have obtained
a version of their armor that's actually fit for human use. Having access to at
least this much would enable the PCs to better stand up to the sort of alien
that would show up later on, as their successes mounted.

[1]: {{ "/projects/gurps-xcom-reports/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/gurps/2017/03/30/x-com-arsenal-of-ruin.html" | relative_url }}
