---
layout: post
title: "The Peoples of Tamriel: Elves"
image: /assets/5f282d3ec21fc323b5673ff706b203181bf1220f_hq.jpg
tags:
    - gurps
    - adaptation
    - elder-scrolls
    - skyrim
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/5f282d3ec21fc323b5673ff706b203181bf1220f_hq.jpg" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is the second post in a series about the bringing peoples of Tamriel to a
GURPS fantasy game. This post deals with elves, just as [the first one][1] dealt
with humans.

## Elves in Tamriel

As it happens in most fantasy settings, the Elves of Tamriel[^1] are a bit
taller than its humans on average, and have large almond-shaped eyes and pointy
ears. They're also more inherently magical than humans, though that extra magic
tends to conform itself to the environment a given elven people occupies over
time.

Like humans, each elven people is associated with a different region of Tamriel,
briefly described in their template. Each template also includes "typical"
cultural traits and adventuring professions for a native of that region, which
could apply to anyone born there.

Most elven people live much longer than humans, but in a typical Dungeon Fantasy
campaign that's not worth any points[^2].

### Altmer (25 Points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/LG-avatar-High_Elf_Male_1.png" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

High Elves in all settings tend to have a reputation as snobs, and these guys
are no exception. Altmer are on average taller than humans, with golden skin and
white or golden hair. Their eyes are usually gold, amber or green in color.

Altmer are the _original_ elves, at least according to their own traditions. All
the other elven peoples originated from groups of Altmer dissidents who left
their homeland of Summerset Isle and migrated elsewhere. While individual High
Elves vary a lot in their outlook, the highly stratified society of Summerset
Island is founded on the idea that they're better than everyone else.

Altmer religion teaches they are the direct descendants of gods who were tricked
into giving up their divinity so the world could be created. They ruled a
continent-spanning empire in Tamriel long before humans arrived on the scene,
and the islands don't lack for extremists who want to bring the good old days
back at the expense of everyone else. The latest of these are the fascist
Thalmor, who by the events of Skyrim are alarmingly close to conquering Tamriel.

The younger generations tend to be much more egalitarian and open-minded, as do
Altmer of all ages who live outside of Summerset. Their innate facility with
magic and the wide availability of quality training in Summerset means Altmer
adventurers are commonly Wizards or members of other spellcasting professions
(like, say, [Magic Archers][3]). Even High Elves who are nominally knights or
swashbucklers know a few spells.

**Advantages**: Magery 1 {15}; Energy Reserve (Magical) 3 {9}; Better Power
Items {1}.

**Other Traits**: Some level of Intolerance is extremely common among Thalmor
members, and even those Altmer who oppose their ideology might still be prone to
bouts of well-meaning condescension that translate into an Odious Personal
Habit.

### Bosmer (25 points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/LG-avatar-Wood_Elf_Male_2.png" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Bosmer or Wood Elves call the temperate, heavily-forested province of Valenwood
their home. Their appearance and behavior are pretty much those of cliche wood
elves from other settings: they're all about archery and protecting their forest
homes.

Many Valenwood Bosmer go even beyond the cliche by becoming members of the Green
Pact, a religious philosophy that exhorts them to avoid harming plants and
natural environments, never take the shape of beasts, and never kill
wastefully. Green Pact followers are strict carnivores who feel morally
obligated to eat or otherwise make use everything they kill - for the most
extreme among them, that includes _people_. They can't make any objects from
plant matter, but can use those made by others just fine.

Scouts and Druids are by far the most popular professions for Bosmer
adventurers.

**Advantages**: Animal Empathy {5}; Animal Friend {5}; Forest Guardian 2 {10};
Resistant to Poison +3 {5}.

**Other Traits**: Disciplines of Faith (Green Pact) is worth -15 points and is
common in Valendood proper. Green Pact extremists also have Odious Personal
Habit (Cannibal) for another -15 points and a -3 to reactions from anyone who is
not similarly inclined. This should probably be restricted to NPCs. Bosmer PCs
might also opt to take plain old Sense of Duty (Nature) instead or not take any
of these disadvantages at all, particularly if they were raised outside of
Valenwood.

### Dunmer (20 points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/LG-avatar-Dark_Elf_Male_2.png" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Dunmer, also known as Dark Elves, have ash-colored skin, black, dark brown or
white hair, and red or amber eyes. They hail from the volcanic land of
Morrowind, which they share with giant mushrooms, giant insects, and a whole lot
of ash. They are widely known as fierce warriors and aggressive spellcasters,
shaped by their harsh environment and cutthroat politics.

Morrowind is dominated by four noble houses who divide the important functions
of society among themselves. Needless to say, they constantly scheme against
each other: this is a realm whose premier law enforcement agency is a guild of
assassins. They spent much of their history worshipping a pantheon that was
basically an ascended adventuring party. After the events of **Morrowind** they
mostly revert back to their old gods. In both cases ancestor worship remains an
important component of their religion.

Dunmer adventurers tend to be Knights and Wizards, or professions that combine
both (like the Mystic Knights from Pyramid #3/13). Thieves and Assassins (or
even Ninja!) are also common. Your typical Dunmer wizard tends to prefer
elements other than fire for their damage spells, since they expect to be
slinging those at other Dunmer in the course of their many violent
intrigues. Their tradition of ancestor worship means necromancy is looked upon a
lot more favorably in Morrowind than it is elsewhere.

**Advantages**: Damage Resistance (Limited, Heat/Fire -40%) 5 {15}; Magery 0
{5}.

**Other Traits**: Getting your PCs tangled in Dunmer House politics is an
excellent way to introduce all sorts of social traits like Enemies, Allies,
Secrets, Patrons and Contacts in a game that didn't include them previously.

### Orsimer (21 points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/LG-avatar-Orc_Male_1.png" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

In Tamriel, Orcs are Elves too! They were almost universally reviled for a long
time, but their loyal service to the Empire over the years earned them
acceptance. They look big, green, and tusky, and unlike other Mer live about as
long as humans.

The orcish homeland isn't an official province, but rather a series of mountain
ranges that falls within High Rock, Skyrim and Valenwood. Their capital is the
city of Orsinium, which has been sacked and rebuilt multiple times in different
locations throughout the history of Tamriel. Traditional orcish culture makes
Nords seem like peace-loving softies. They basically worship the God of Having A
Chip on Your Shoulder.

Orcish adventurers favor big, brawny professions like Knight and Barbarian,
though orcish Artificers are also surprisingly common and tend to specialize
either in smithing or in alchemy.

**Advantages**: Focused Fury {1}; Great Rage 1 {20}.

**Other Traits**: Both advantages above are from Dungeon Fantasy Denizens:
Barbarians. If the campaign takes place in a time or place where orcs are
particularly reviled, they would also have an appropriate Social Stigma. Like
Nords, though, orcish Barbarians in campaigns taking place in their homeland
aren't considered a Minority Group. Some level of Berserk is quite common,
though.


[1]: {{ "/2018/09/28/elder-scrolls-humans.html" | absolute_url }}
[3]: {{ "/gurps/2016/10/19/characters-magic-archer.html" | absolute_url }}

[^1]: Also known as "Mer" by scholars.
[^2]: The life span of a _delver_ tends to be rather short regardless of
    species.
