---
layout: post
title: "Quick and Dirty Technical Grappling"
tags:
    - gurps
---

As I mentioned in my [previous post][1], I like the Technical Grappling rules on
principle but find them way too detailed for most games in practice. Here's my
attempt to simplify them into something I can use.

My main goal here is to completely eliminate on-the-fly ST adjustments from the
game. In my experience, nothing has ever reduced the pacing of my games to a
screeching halt like having to look up someone's new damage dice and recalculate
all their attacks. This is not just a Technical Grappling issue, but since that
is the topic of the day let's stick to it.

Referred Control as written also has to go, because it involves a similar
amount of "recalculate everything right now".

Any references to "the book" below refer to GURPS Technical Grappling, and the
"core rules" are the ones from GURPS Characters and Campaigns.

## Trained ST

This is _gone_. It's one more thing to track for each individual skill and it
raises too slowly to make any difference for most games.

Use the Wrestling bonus from the core rules for that skill and ignore the
concept for the others. Buy Lifting ST instead.

## Grappling Attacks and Damage

Grappling still does Control Point damage, because that's the core of the
system! CP damage is annotated as "control" in attack stat lines.

All unarmed grappling attacks inflict CP damage equal to the "thrust" value for
your ST. Lifting ST improves your ST for this purpose and so does the Wrestling
bonus when using that skill. Add +1 damage for each limb used beyond the first
two.

Armed grappling works mostly like in the book, except you always use your full
ST to calculate control damage. Entangling weapons use your _base_ skill level
instead (not the effective one for that specific attack). This allows you to
write the control damage for your armed grapples _once_ and not worry about it
later on, similar to how normal attacks work.

Any monster whose attacks "automatically count as a successful grapple" in
things like Dungeon Fantasy do linked control damage equal to the basic damage
of their attack. So if that Giant Enemy Crab has claws that do 2d+2 cut, they
now also do 2d+2 control!

Grapplers can still only maintain a maximum amount of CP equal to their ST.

## Effects of Control Points

Every 2 CP applied to a target translate into a -1 penalty to DX. If the
target's torso or head is being grappled this applies to all their actions. If a
limb is being grappled, the full penalty applies to any actions involving that
limb. Half the penalty applies to all other actions. Treat grapples to multiple
locations as a single grapple to the torso with their combined CP.

In the example from page 6 of Technical grappling, that would give our pal
And'Rezik a total of 13 CP on his target. It's only 2 CP less and you didn't
need to halt your fight for 5 minutes to figure that out!

Control points can be spent in the same ways as in the book, and grappled
targets can attempt to erode them with their own grapple attacks subject to the
DX penalty, as usual.

## That's All, Folks!

That's pretty much it. I haven't actually _tested_ this system in play, but it's
what I'm going to use in the next game I run where grappling is a thing. I'm
sure I've missed some edge cases from the original book, but if those ever
become a problem I'll address them at that time.


[1]: {{ "/2018/04/02/my-gurps-house-rules.html" | relative_link }}
