---
layout: post
title: "One-Post Skyrim"
image: /assets/shout.jpeg
tags:
    - gurps
    - setting
    - adaptation
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/shout.jpeg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QImBolnTVH8">ONE POOOOOOOOOST!</a>
    <a href="https://www.primagames.com/games/elder-scrolls-v-skyrim/video/top-five-shouts-video">
      (image source)
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

I've been playing a lot of Skyrim lately, and it occurred to me that adapting
that to GURPS could be a fun project. So I'm going to do that in this post.

And when I say "in this post", I mean that literally! I do not intend to spend
the next three years writing about this like I did with my Dragon's Dogma
project. This means I'm going to cheat like a cheating cheater and take
shortcuts. Whenever I can get away with giving page references to published
books or links to other articles, I will do so. The result should still resemble
the thing I'm trying to adapt, and those who disagree with that can still use
the post as "Iteration One" in their own more elaborate efforts.

## Themes and Gameplay

Before we can start messing about with rules we have to take a look at our
source material, which in this case is the **Skyrim** computer game (written in
bold from now on to differentiate it from the Skyrim region). **Skyrim** is
just one part of the extensive Elder Scrolls franchise, but I'm going to
restrict myself to just the one game as source material. Consider it my first
cheat.

If I were to describe **Skyrim** in one sentence, I'd call it the video-game
version of a sandbox campaign with a heavy power fantasy element.

How **Skyrim** a sandbox campaign? It has pretty much the exact same core
gameplay loop. You create a character to your liking and wander around a large
region peppered with dungeons and other interesting places to visit. You add to
your to-do list by talking to NPCs and receiving quests from them, or by
overhearing and reading rumors which point you to particular dungeons. While
wandering around the map you also periodically run into random
encounters. There's technically a "main quest", but the game doesn't pressure
you into completing it any more than it does any other quest, and completing it
doesn't end the game.

How does **Skyrim** give you a power fantasy? Through the rules, by using a
skill-based system that gives every player character access to every skill in
the game. And through the story, by allowing PCs to play through multiple
quest-lines that would usually _each_ take up a whole character's career. Not
only can you become a legendary fighter, mage _and_ thief, you can also become
the head honcho of the Fighters', Mages', _and_ Thieves' Guilds. It also doesn't
make you wait until you're "powerful enough" to give you access to its more
"epic" storylines: you kill your first dragon quite early in the main quest,
interact with several deities starting not long after, take on (or _join_) a
cabal of millenia-old vampires who want to blot out the sun, and so on.

### Choice of System

So how are we going to adapt this for the tabletop? We want something whose
"feel" approaches the one I described above for the original game. I'm going to
use GURPS Dungeon Fantasy because of course I will, but there are good reasons
for choosing it aside from my fanboyism.

I believe GURPS is particularly well-suited here because it allows for
considerable flexibility in character creation. Dungeon Fantasy with its
insistence in sticking to templates is a little less flexible, but that
restriction is easy to relax and we'll be doing so here.

Other advantages of Dungeon Fantasy: its 250-point starting heroes allow players
to feel powerful and take on "epic" challenges right away, and it has ready-made
mechanics for most of the situations routinely encountered by **Skyrim**
players.

Also of note are the things that will be different from the computer game: it
will be aimed at a whole party of PCs instead of a lone hero and it will use the
standard pace of DF character advancement.

## Places

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/skyrim-map.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A map of Skyrim
    <a href="https://www.deviantart.com/hlarosa/art/Map-of-the-Province-of-Skyrim-688313874">
      (image source)
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The place we're concerned about is Skyrim! This is the "frozen north" of the
continent of Tamriel, a roughly rectangular region bounded by mountain chains to
the south, east and west and by the Sea of Ghosts to the north.

In-game Skyrim is around 40 square kilometers in size, but that's obviously
because it's highly "truncated" as is usual for this type of game. There's no
published official size, though it appears someone has managed to [extract a
halfway plausible measurement][2] over on Reddit that indicates Skyrim would be
about the size of Poland. That means its linear measurements would need to be in
the order of _100 times_ larger than their in-game size: about 500km tall and
600km wide[^2]. That's quite large! It would take weeks to hike from one end of
Skyrim to the other, and that's ignoring things like monster or bandit attacks.

The climate near the southern border is on the cold end of temperate. As you go
north, both elevation and average temperature drop. Grasslands and temperate
forests give way to conifers and frozen marshes, then tundra and fjords on the
northern coast. The topography is quite "wrinkly", with several minor mountain
ranges dotting the interior of the province. There are two river systems, one to
the southeast and another to the northwest, both flowing north to the sea.

Politically, the region is divided into nine holds, which you can see in the
above map. Skyrim is officially a province of the Cyrodillic Empire, having
joined it in the distant past through alliance rather than conquest. The
Imperials are basically off-brand Romans, and you could explain any significant
departures from the Viking cultural baseline through this centuries-long
association.

Settlement distribution follows the same model as the one I described for
[Gransys][3], and since the in-game map isn't as aggressively minimalist as that
of Dragon's Dogma you can have a better idea of where they would be. Hold
capitals are usually major cities, and the other settlements that appear in the
game would mostly count as "towns". Villages, as usual, are everywhere, though I
guess Whiterun with its fertile plains has a lot more of them than The
Pale. Towns and cities are linked by a fairly good, though winding, road
network.

## People

Though Skyrim is the home of the Nords, all of Tamriel's peoples find themselves
represented here one way or the other. Players should be able to create
characters belonging to any of them. Since all of them will live in Skyrim and
be part of its society, that's where we will focus our attention.

Nords are basically off-brand Vikings. Hall of Judgment and Dragon Heresy
contain great descriptions of a fantasy Viking culture that would be an
excellent starting base for Skyrim's Nords. The main differences are that there
are no thralls in Skyrim, and the Nords follow the setting-specific Nine Divines
instead of the Aesir. Jarls and Karls work as in HoJ/DH, but Thane is a formal
position granted by a Jarl to people who have done a great service to the
kingdom, roughly equivalent to a knighthood in importance. Thanes are expected
to continue performing the services that gained them the title in the first
place, but don't much else in the way of formal obligations.

Law and order is a bit more formal in Skyrim than in the other settings I
mentioned, possibly because of Imperial influence. Each hold keeps a permanent
contingent of guards responsible both for repelling external attacks and for
keeping the peace internally. Criminals must still pay a bounty commensurate
with their crimes, but that bounty is paid to the _hold_, which presumably then
sees that the wronged party is properly compensated. Those who can't pay their
own bounty usually end up rotting in jail for a commensurate amount of time. A
Thane who gets caught committing a crime might be able to use their station to
escape punishment, but this too has its limits. Commit enough crimes and the
Jarl declare you an outlaw and start offering a bounty on your head: that's how
bandit gangs are born.

### Character Creation

Starting characters are built on 250 points, and are assumed to be somewhat
experienced adventurers already. Players may use any DF professional template
they wish, but are explicitly _not_ restricted to only the traits in their
chosen template during character creation or advancement. Completely freeform
character creation is also allowed. I'm aware this might open up some
unexpectedly powerful combinations - adjudicating those is left as an exercise
to the GM.

Racial templates are easy:

**Nords**, **Bretons**, **Imperials** and **Redguards** are all human.

**Skyrim** also has a whole lot of elves, but so does DF, and they map almost
directly to one another! **Altmer** are High Elves, **Bosmer** are Wood Elves,
**Dunmer** are Shadow Elves. **Orcs** are technically elves in Tamriel, and are
best represented by the Half-Orc template. Even **Dwarves** are a kind of elf in
this setting, but there are none left alive.

**Khajit** are obviously Catfolk, and Dragon-blooded make passable **Argonians**
if you replace the fiery breath and Reputation with Doesn't Breathe (Gills,
-50%).

Further tweaking of all of these is not only possible but advisable, and is left
as an exercise for the reader.

Magic works differently than standard Dungeon Fantasy. Skyrim is effectively an
[agnostic Dungeon Fantasy][4] setting that takes the Simple Option for spells
and the Cool Option for non-spell powers. Even characters who start off without
any Magery may buy it with earned character points. Any enemy group with more
than a handful of members is likely to contain one or more spellcasters, and
many people know a useful spell or two even if they don't call themselves
wizards.

### The Voice

The Voice should be modeled as a form of Sorcery, should a GM with to include
it. Each Shout is a separate power that comes in three levels, corresponding to
the number of words known or utilized. Students of the Voice rarely learn more
than one or two Shouts, buying them directly and paying the full cost. Knowing
even one makes you quite a bit more dangerous than you would be in the computer
game, since there are no cooldowns in the default Sorcery rules!

And since I know you're going to ask: no amount of Unusual Background can make
someone Dragonborn. This is a trait best assigned by a GM who wishes to make it
the focus of the campaign. The in-game effect is that you get a chunk of points
to spend on the Voice every time you kill a dragon, and can use them to buy
Talent or Sorcerous Empowerment for Voice powers.

Creating specific Shouts is left as an exercise for the GM, but here's an
example:

#### Unrelenting Force (Fus-Ro-Dah)

- _Keywords_: Obvious
- _Full Cost_: 15/30/45
- _Casting Roll_: None. Use Innate Attack (Breath) to hit.
- _Range_: 20m
- _Duration_ Instantaneous.

Projects a cone of force in front of the user that pushes everything in its path
away. The force doesn't damage its targets directly, but can throw them great
distances and will definitely hurt if it knocks someone into a wall or over a
ledge.

Does 2d, 4d or 6d crushing damage with the No Wounding and Double Knockback
modifiers, out to a range of 20 meters. The cone is 3m wide at maximum
range. Diffuse targets take full damage!

_Traits_: Crushing Attack 2, 4 or 6 with (Cone, 3m, +80%; Double Knockback +20%;
Variable + 5%; Blockable -5%; Reduced Max 1/5, -10%; No Wounding except versus
Diffuse targets -25%; Sorcery -15%;)

## Stuff

For the most part, you should be fine using the default equipment list for
either version of Dungeon Fantasy. Applying the modifiers described in Hall of
Judgment on top of that will get you something that's a lot more Nord-flavored.

The computer game made a big deal of organizing weapons and armor in tiers that
used different materials, but those can be replaced with the special DF
materials and modifiers without losing much of anything - particularly if you
have DF 8: Treasure Tables or DF Treasures 1: Glittering Prizes, which have a
list of "impossible materials" that work as supernatural embelishments to
weapons and include several familiar names (glass, ebony...).

## Adventures

Skyrim is lousy with ancient Nord burial mounds and tomb-complexes, each filled
with traps, treasure, and lots of draugr who will be very angry when they see
you taking their stuff. If grave-robbing is not your thing, you can hunt down
bandits or murderous fauna for bounties, enter the service of an organization
such as the Companions or the College of Winterhold[^3], or try to talk a
Daedric lord or twelve into revealing where their pet artifacts are located.

**Skyrim**'s story takes place during a time when the Empire is in decline due
to a prolonged conflict with the Aldmeri Dominion and the fascist Thalmor that
govern it. Most of its other provinces have either been conquered by the
Dominion or seceded when the Empire signed a peace treaty with the Thalmor that
made several heavy concessions. There's an ugly civil war going on in Skyrim
between the Imperial legions and a rebel faction who call themselves the
Stormcloaks and seek to secede from the Empire as well. The Thalmor play one
against the other from the shadows. Taking part in the civil war could make for
an interesting campaign, but it's also perfectly possible to play during a more
peaceful time either before or after the game's story.

No matter where you wish to go, simply getting there is an adventure in
itself. Using the wilderness survival rules from DF 16 or Hall of Judgment is
strongly encouraged. If you're playing in the same time frame as the computer
game, make sure to include dragons in your wandering monster tables[^4].

## Conclusion

So this is a Skyrim adaptation in one post. If you would like me to revisit one
of the topics here in more depth, feel free to drop me a comment!

[1]: {{ "/gurps/2016/09/28/adapting-video-games.html" | absolute_url }}
[2]: https://www.reddit.com/r/teslore/comments/ui64h/tamriels_size_in_square_miles/
[3]: {{ "/gurps/2016/10/03/how-big-is-this-place.html" | absolute_url }}
[4]: {{ "/2017/08/30/agnostic-dungeon-fantasy.html" | absolute_url }}

[^2]: As it happens, Skyrim is also about the same _shape_ as Poland.

[^3]: They like robbing ancient tomb-complexes too, but they call it research.

[^4]: Or even the _weather_ tables. "Cloudy with a chance of dragon attack in
    the afternoon" sometimes seems to be the default weather for the region.
