---
layout: post
title: "On Cyberpunk"
tags:
    - rant
    - cyberpunk
    - gurps
    - shadowrun
    - ths
---



There's this William Gibson short story, from way back at the beginning of his
career, called "The Gernsback Continuum". You could argue it's a neat
encapsulation of everything the cyberpunk literary movement was all about.

It's about a photographer who gets hired to travel through the US and take
pictures for an art book, of buildings built using this very specific sort of
40's-50's architecture. You know the one: aerodynamic fins and flanges
everywhere, meant to look "futuristic" in a robots-and-spaceships kind of
way. Of course, the story takes place in the 80s so everyone there knows the
future these buildings were alluding to never came to pass. That's what the art
book is going to be about, that nostalgic lost future feeling.

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/4068434493_169d027a70_b.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Sometimes the fins have flanges.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Our protagonist gets so into it that he starts hallucinating that future. Silver
teardrop-shaped cars driving on the highway or flying in the sky above it. A
plane that's a huge flying wing with twelve propeller engines, two squash courts
and a ballroom.

It culminates in an entire city (Tucson, IIRC) visible on the horizon being
replaced by a version of itself that's all impossibly tall flanged towers linked
by crystal roads and swarming with those silver cars and with Beautiful People
in Togas. There's a couple of them right beside our protagonist, though they
don't see him. They talk to each other with sweeping gestures and bold
statements that can be summarized as "Isn't the future great? And it's all
ours!"

At that precise moment, our protagonist freaks the fuck out. I was a dumb
teenager when I first read this story, so I didn't quite get what was so
horrible about that moment. Now I do. Every one of those Beautiful People in
Togas is white, blond and blue-eyed. _What the heck did they do to everyone
else?_ Perhaps that lost future never coming to pass isn't a bad thing at
all[^1]. In the end the protagonist gets rid of the hallucinations through a
steady diet of crappy media and headline news about the oil crisis.

The story's title refers to [Hugo Gernsback][1], the man responsible for editing
the science fiction magazine _Amazing Stories_ from 1926 to 1936. I'm guessing
everything our poor photographer sees comes from that magazine, too, or from
other publications influenced by its style stretching into the 50s. Gernsback
also lends his name to the Hugos, one of the two top literary prizes in the
field of SF.

The cyberpunk movement, whose writers would end up winning quite a few Hugos
themselves, was in large part a reaction to this style of science fiction. As
the introduction to Guardians of Order's _Ex Machina_ so aptly puts it,
cyberpunk stories were about outsiders trying to survive and find happiness in
the face of an oppressive society. Cyberpunk protagonists, Gibson's in
particular, were often criminals, drug addicts, poor, kids, people of color, or
more than one of the above at the same time.

The worlds of classic literary cyberpunk had all sorts of social problems that
were directly inspired by the present in which those stories had been
written. They weren't exactly extrapolations, but rather commentary on the
present. Since the stories were set in the future, I think they also ended up
presenting us with another message: those issues don't just go away because
technology advances. If you ignore them today, they'll still haunt you tomorrow.

By now I've read a bunch of online discussions where people say the cyberpunk
genre is dated or outright obsolete. We're no longer in the Eighties. Things
have changed. The tech looks either retro or absurd to our modern eyes, the USSR
imploded, Japanese companies didn't take over the world.

I feel this argument is kinda missing the point. The specific technologies and
setting elements that appear in classic cyberpunk stories are indeed a product
of their time, but they're just props. The themes and motifs behind those props
are timeless. It's quite possible to write a story with more up-to-date props
that still feels cyberpunk. Heck, Gibson himself never stopped doing exactly
that.

Overly focusing on the props is a mistake a I feel a lot of people
make. These people include a good number of RPG writers and fans,
unfortunately. I clearly remember reading an article that talked about just such
a thing once, but unfortunately I can't remember where. So when I next talk
about this, I'm going to be writing my own version of that article.


[^1]: Me not getting the horror of this situation was a spectacular feat of
    unmitigated dumbassery. The comparison between this vision of the future and
    Nazi propaganda was right there in the story.


[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hugo_Gernsback
