---
layout: post
title: "On the Relationship Between Castlevania and Ravenloft"
tags:
    - rpg
    - castlevania
    - ravenloft
    - gurps
---

There _probably_ isn't a direct relationship between them. The original
I6 Ravenloft module came out in 1983. The original Castevania game for the NES
came out in 1986. On the one hand this was the 8-bit era, so it's likely
Castlevania began its development after Ravenloft had come out. On the other
hand pen-and-paper RPGs were a small-scale hobby and no one had casual access to
the Internet back then, so it's unlikely that Castevania's Japanese developers
would have heard of the module.

Still, both Ravenloft and Castlevania very clearly get inspiration from the same
sources, and tell remarkably similar stories: one or more intrepid adventurers
enter a gloomy kindgom ruled by an ancient and cruel vampire lord, break into
said lord's castle, and kill him with a weapon destined for the purpose[^1].

The environments in both are heavily inspired by gothic literature and monster
movies. As games, both have a reputation for being quite hard. Strahd from
Ravenloft is clearly inspired by the literary Dracula, with a different name to
make him more copyrightable. Konami went the other way and named their vampire
Dracula while making him completely different in most other aspects.

I mention the original I6 adventure specifically because I think Ravenloft loses
quite a bit of its Castlevania-ness when it turns into a campaign setting with a
metaplot and that business with the Mists. The original adventures set up
dynamic scenarios: things are bad, and have been for a while, but the PCs are
fully expected to upset the apple cart as soon as they get into the picture. The
Ravenloft campaign setting, on the other hand, is just another static D&D
setting where the only allowed changes are handed down from on high in the form
of metaplot.

√ç haven't really read the new-ish Curse of Strahd sourcebook[^2], but I gather
it's tries to turn I6 into a full campaign starting the characters at level 1
and lavishing praise on Strahd himself at every opportunity. Since I didn't
really intend to use the rules as printed on either version I went with the
cheaper one.

There's no deeper insight here. Just something I've been thinking off and on for
a while. I'm obviously not the first person to think of this: someone
home-brewed a campaign setting called Barovania back on 2012 or so which mixed a
lot of old-school Nintendo lore with the usual old-school D&D soup. Finding a
link to that now is a challenge, but I remember reading it.

In any case, if you want a Castlevania experience in your tabletop, you can
pretty much run I6 Ravenloft as written and just convert the monster and item
stats to your system of choice. Maybe use the Castlevania soundtrack as mood
music. There are quite a few organ arrangements for it too. You could also forgo
the random placement of the special treasures and make it so one of them is in
a place that's easy to see but impossible to reach without first finding the
other.

For extra franchise power, after your group beats Strahd, run Ravenloft 2: The
House on Gryphon Hill as a sequel by having it take place 100 years later and
feature the descendants of the PCs in the first adventure. All the thematic
stuff you need is already in there and pretty system-neutral.

[^1]: You can technically kill Strahd without finding the Sun Blade first if
    you're badass enough, but doing things in the "proper" order is both easier
    and more dramatic.

[^2]: Curse of Strahd is only available in print, which makes it hella
    expensive. I6 and Gryphon Hill were available as PDFs for much, much less.
