---
layout: post
title: "The Peoples of Tamriel: Everyone Else"
image: /assets/5f282d3ec21fc323b5673ff706b203181bf1220f_hq.jpg
tags:
    - gurps
    - adaptation
    - elder-scrolls
    - skyrim
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/5f282d3ec21fc323b5673ff706b203181bf1220f_hq.jpg" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is the third and final post in a mini-series about bringing the peoples of
Tamriel to a GURPS fantasy game. This post deals with anyone who's neither a
human nor an elf.

Scholars from the Empire or the Aldmeri dominion tend to call these people
"Beast-Folk", both because many of them bear an obvious resemblance to some sort
of animal and because these exalted nations tend to view them as somewhat
less than civilized. Like everyone else, though, they have rich cultures and
long histories. They are also quite well-adapted to their home environments.

## Argonian (20 Points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/LG-avatar-Argonian_Female_2.png" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Argonians (or Saxhleel, as they call themselves) are a reptilian people native
to the swampy region of Black Marsh. They resemble scaly humans with a tail and
a lizard head, and sometimes have feathers or horns as well. Their scales come
in various shades of dark brown, gray or green, sometimes marked with patterns
unique to the individual.

Well-adapted to their native environment, Argonians are amphibious and highly
resistant to disease. They're known as experts in guerilla warfare, having had
to defend their homes against foreign invasions many times in Tamriel's long and
convoluted history.

Argonian adventurers thrive in flooded environments. Those native to Black Marsh
are commonly Scouts, Barbarians, or Thieves with some supplemental wilderness
survival training. An all-Argonian party can go in underwater adventures without
any special magic or equipment!

**Advantages**: Amphibious {10}; Doesn't Breathe (Gills, -50%) {10}; Resistant
to Disease +3 {5}.

**Disadvantages**: Cold-Blooded {-5}.

**Features**: Tail; Body and head armor needs to be adapted to accommodate the
tail and unusual head shape. This usually doesn't cost extra, but might restrict
their usage of looted armor.

**Other Traits**: Argonians are the target of prejudice in several provinces of
Tamriel, like Morrowind and Skyrim. In games taking place mostly in those
provinces, they would have Social Stigma (Minority Group).

## Khajit (25 points)

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/LG-avatar-Khajiit_Female_1.png" | relative_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Khajit require surprisingly little explanation for those who are already
familiar with Dungeon Fantasy. They're Catfolk! While an individual Khajit's
appearance is _technically_ influenced by the configuration of Nirn's two moons
when they are born, that's mostly an attempt by the franchise's writers to
"explain" why the design for playable Khajit characters went from "humans with
funny face tattoos" to something that matches the description of DF Catfolk
pretty much exactly.

Khajit hail from the tropical region of Elsweyr (pronounced "Elsewhere"). This
tropical province is about equally split into an inland expanse or arid
badlands, and a lush coastal region criss-crossed by extensive river basins. The
former is inhabited by fierce nomadic warriors, the later by sugar cane
plantation owners, farm workers, and urban merchants. Those plantations produce
Moon Sugar, the region's chief export. Moon Sugar's properties vary a lot
depending on what source you're consulting: they seem to range from "it's just
sugar" to "it's crystallized catnip". In either case it has many more or less
legitimate culinary and alchemical uses. It can also be distilled into Skooma, a
drink that's definitely closer to the "catnip" end of the spectrum and banned in
most regions of Tamriel.

Khajit adventurers tend to prefer "skirmisher" professions like Scouts,
Swashbucklers and Thieves. Being naturally equipped with claws, they also put
greater emphasis in unarmed combat than most, and so also count many Martial
Artists among their number.

**Advantages**: Catfall {10}; Sharp Claws {5}; Sharp Teeth {1}; Fur {1}; Night
Vision 8 {8}.

**Features**: Tail (not prehensile, and easily tucked into armor).

**Other Traits**: GMs who prefer to use the default Catfolk statistics for
Khajit are free to do so, either in place of these or alongside them (as a
different variety). Addiction to Skooma is a -15 point disadvantage: it's
incapacitating, highly addictive, and illegal. Addiction to Moon Sugar, if the
GM decides it has drug-like properties at all, is worth -5 points in those
places where it is illegal, and 0 points otherwise. These can apply to _anyone_,
not just Khajit, no matter what the Altmer try to tell you.

## Others

Many allusions are made in Elder Scrolls lore to other "beast-folk" species,
though these have never been playable in the games. A lot of them show up as
enemies, though.

- Standard goblins and ogres exist in Tamriel, and are viewed here much as they
  are in any other setting.

- Giants have roamed Skyrim since time immemorial, and maintain a wary
  relationship with its human inhabitants. They have a Paleolithic tribal
  culture and are known for herding mammoths.

- The simian Imga share Valenwood with the Bosmer. The Alessian Order that
  eventually created the First Empire based their religion on the teachings of
  an Imga prophet.

- The Hist are sapient _trees_, said to be the oldest form of sapient life in
  Tamriel. Most of them are located in Black Marsh, and are at the center of
  Argonian culture and society.

And so on, and so forth. Throughout various places and times you can also find
snake-people (Lamias), slug-people (Sloads), fox-people (Lilmothiit), Minotaurs,
and so on. Like elves, feel free to introduce a new variety every time your
players think they got it all figured out.
