---
layout: post
title: "Review: Hall of Judgment"
tags:
  - gurps
  - dungeon-fantasy
  - adventure
  - review
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/hall-of-judgment-cover.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2018 Gaming Ballistic LLC
    <a href="http://www.warehouse23.com/products/dungeon-fantasy-hall-of-judgment">
      (image source)
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

**Hall of Judgment** is a particularly notable adventure for the **Dungeon
Fantasy RPG**, because it's published not by Steve Jackson Games but by Gaming
Ballistic LLC. It's not only the first licensed DFRPG book, it's also the first
licensed GURPS book I've ever heard of.

It was published fairly recently as of this writing, after a successful
[kickstarter campaign][1]. I backed it pretty early on, and now I have a copy of
the final **Hall of Judgment** PDF in my screen. So let's review it!

## TL; DR

If you already have the DFRPG boxed set and are looking for supplements to add
to your game, this should be at the very top of your shopping list. It contains
a Viking-flavored mini-setting with plenty of cultural notes; four separate
dungeons; a set of rules for wilderness travel; the GURPS version of the Dungeon
Grappling rules; approximately 30 new monsters; and 17 setting-appropriate
pre-made player characters.

If you also have the Dragon Heresy intro set and wanted to play in that setting
using GURPS rules, then this book should get you most of the way there.

## On the Book Itself

**Hall of Judgment** is a 132-page book describing all of the stuff I mentioned
in the TL; DR section. I backed this at the PDF level, so this is what I
have. The physical book will be softcover and produced via Print-on-Demand - it
seems the campaign didn't quite reach the stretch goal for fancier printing
options.

The layout is a bit similar to that of the Dragon Heresy intro-set, but it feels
"GURPSier", as it should. The font is a bit different, the columns are closer
together and the ornamentation around the edges of the pages is different. It
all still feels pretty Vigking-ish. **Hall of Judgement** also reuses several
pieces of art from the DH intro set, which is fine by me as they also fit well
here.

The writing is reminiscent of plenty of other Dungeon Fantasy products, a style
I personally like. The setting descriptions are written in a way that makes it
more amenable to a full reading than quick reference, but the dungeons have a
clearly labeled section for each room, with labeled paragraphs describing the
challenges, rewards, alternative ways of dealing with the challenges, and
anything that might be initially concealed from the PCs. I'm sure the Ten Foot
Pole guy would think they're still a little too verbose, though.

And once again, this book has a table of contents and index comparable to those
of a GURPS book, which is awesome.

## On the Setting

The mini-setting contained in this book consists of the city of Isfjall and its
surrounding region, which includes Lake Odin, a few other
named-but-not-described villages, and a large and dangerous wilderness
containing four separate dungeons. One of those is the titular Hall.

This is a _significant_ expansion over this adventure's initial incarnation as
_Lost Hall of Tyr_ for D&D 5th Edition, which from what I gather started with
the PCs arriving near the Hall already. The whole setting is really a slice of
Torengar, the [Dragon Heresy][2] world, but in the KS campaign's words it has
been "mildly de-Norsed" so as to be dropped into any Dungeon Fantasy campaign as
the generic "Frozen North" from which barbarian characters frequently hail.

Isfjall is described in great detail for a Dungeon Fantasy work, in which "Town"
is usually entirely abstract. You get a rundown of the town's economy, a little
primer on local culture, social hiearchies, religion and law, and a list of
almost-weekly festivals covering the whole year. Reading this you get a real
sense of why people built a town _here_, where the money and food comes from,
and what their daily lives are like. You can set your adventure at any given day
in a year and know what the town will look like on that day, from the
information given here.

This plus a table of rumors and the hook for the main dungeon take up a little
under 20 pages.

I liked this section quite a lot. It's a nice departure from the "village of
dirt farmers plagued by mysterious disappearances" that features in so many
D&D-ish modules, and it's easy enough to modify. You can add the serial numbers
back on by replacing a few names, if you want to play in Torengar or stop
pretending the local pantheon aren't the Aesir. You can also take it in the
other direction and, say, turn this into the basis for a Skyrim adaptation.

## On the Adventure

Right after the chapter on Isfjall is a chapter on "The Journey", which has a
neat little set of wilderness travel rules. They won't be news to people who
already own GURPS Dungeon Fantasy 16, but they're an awesome addition for anyone
who only owns the boxed set. Each of the three sub-regions the PCs will need to
traverse to reach the Hall are given their own encounter table, which contains a
good mix of natural obstacles and non-hostile encounters in addition to hostile
monsters. There is also a weather table covering the whole year. If you want to
really challenge your party, have them set out to find the Hall in the middle of
winter.

All this wilderness traveling can lead to one of four different
dungeons. There's a ruined fortress built atop a barrow that contains the
spirits of all its inhabitants, two different fae lairs and the Hall of Judgment
itself. At no point are your players forced to go to any of them - there's a
strong hook pointing them towards the Hall, but the adventure doesn't impose any
punishment on the PCs if they want to do something else first, or instead. There
are also other minor hook suggestions here for GMs who want to make up their own
adventures in the setting.

The ruined fortress and the Hall of Judgment feel suitably Nordic, and the PCs
are likely to visit the first in their search for the second. The two faerie
warrens are entirely optional deathraps that should be a blast to GM.

## On the New Material

Aside from the town setting and dungeons, this book contains plenty of new
material that should be useful for other campaigns. I already mentioned the
wilderness travel rules - the generic portion of them takes up about two pages,
and the specific portion provides a good worked example of how to stat up a
region's weather.

Then you have Fantastic Dungeon Grappling, which is basically the GURPS version
of Dungeon Grappling rules Mr. Cole wrote for several editions of D&D, which in
turn are a simplified version of the Technical Grappling rules he originally
wrote as a GURPS. I posted [my own take][3] on a simplified Technical Grappling
a few months ago, but the rules from this book are better and I recommend using
them if you can. I've already used them to great effect in a game I'm GMing.

If grappling rules don't ring your bell, the 30+ new monsters statted up here
should make up for that. Each gets a page, with description, DFRPG stats, and an
illustration. All of them show up somewhere in the adventure, though your PCs
aren't expected to fight every last one. You get a mix of wild and domestic
animals, some humans, a few undead and demons, and a whole lot of faeries from
Norse mythology. Even the weakest of _those_ are quite a bit scarier than you'd
expect from their appearance[^1].

After the bestiary there's a group of 16 ready-to-play PCs, most of which are
local to the region. Since the adventure is written for a group of 4 to 6, this
is more than enough to assemble a number of possible parties, which would make
this adventure a lot easier to pick up and play provided the GM knows the book.

## Conclusion

I got this book by backing the Kickstarter campaign at the US$10 tier. It's now
available on [Warehouse 23][4] or [Gaming Ballistic][5] for US$12.50. In its 132
pages it contains an adventure, a setting, new rules, a bestiary and a pre-made
PC portfolio. Given that your typical Dungeon Fantasy supplement only does one
of these things, costs $8, and likely contains some of the same material that
was put into the DFRPG boxed set, this book should probably be at the top of
your shopping list if all you have is that boxed set.

Even if you're a GURPS Dungeon Fantasy player, this is still excellent value for
the money, as the only redundant bit here would be the 2 pages of wilderness
travel rules, and that only if you already have DF 16.


[1]: https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2101297466/hall-of-judgment-a-dungeon-fantasy-rpg-supplement
[2]: {{ "/2018/06/18/dragon-heresy-review.html" | absolute_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2018/04/06/quick-and-dirty-technical-grappling.html" | absolute_url }}
[4]: http://www.warehouse23.com/products/dungeon-fantasy-hall-of-judgment
[5]: https://gamingballistic.com/product/hall-of-judgment-dfrpg-pdf/
