---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Turn of the Torrent, Part II"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/350px-Hell's_Rebels_Logo.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Welcome back to Let's Read Hell's Rebels! This post will cover Part 2 of the
second adventure, Turn of the Torrent. [Part 1][1] had the PCs meet with former
Torrent Hellknight Octavio Sabinus, who promised to join the Silver Ravens
should the PCs rescue his knights from the Old Kintargo Holding House.

Part 2 covers that rescue mission and several other events that happen in the
neighborhood of Old Kintargo. According to the book, its inhabitants are both
the most distrustful of outsiders and the most likely to join the rebellion when
properly inspired, since they have a long tradition of defying Chelish rule in
small ways.

Like in the first adventure, the missions are numbered but can be completed in
any order.

## But First, Some Setup

In a remarkable display of slavish adherence to its adventure outline template,
the book literally ends its Part 1 while the party is mid-conversation with
Octavio Sabinus. You then need to go through two pages of background info and
optional events in the Part 2 before returning to the details of what Sabinus
wants the PCs to do. While the scene on Part 1 does include a page reference
to these details, it's still a bit of an awkward read.

Anyway, Part 2 begins by recommending that the PCs make the Tooth and Nail
tavern a temporary staging area, since all its events happen in the same
neighborhood. It describes some tavern games that are common there, as well as
an NPC they can meet who is actually Part 3's main villain in disguise.

Then it describes Proclamation the Tenth, where The Barzilai outlaws the works
of several poets and writers whose works mock House Thrune. Three of them are
long dead, but one is "The Poison Pen of Kintargo", an NPC who will become
relevant in Mission 2. If one of the PCs is also a poet or writer, their name
should also be on this list, which is the bit I found really interesting.

## Optional Encounter: Being Followed

This optional encounter is where Thrune hires a mercenary detective to follow
the PCs around and report on their movements. Tayacet Tiora is the sort who
claims to ignore politics in favor of getting the job done, but the book says
she will slowly come to realize Barzilai is bad business all around in future
adventures. Any encounters the PCs might have with her here are stated to be
mere foreshadowing for her appearance in future adventures, and she could be
left out entirely.

That's likely for the best, to be honest. Tiora might look cool, but the PCs
won't take kindly to being followed by an agent of the enemy and will be even
more frustrated when she makes her scripted escape.

## Mission 1: Rescue at the Holding House

And here we are, picking up on the Octavio conversation as if the intervening
pages didn't exist.

When discussing the details of this mission, Octavio Sabinus will give them his
prized mithral short sword, explaining it belonged to his mother. Showing the
sword to his knights and repeating that bit of info should serve as proof of the
PC's allegiance, and help secure their cooperation. The sword itself should also
be useful against any devils they run into.

The Holding House is not the most secure prison in the city, but it's still
locked down pretty tight. While the adventure describes the place in sufficient
detail for the PCs to make a frontal assault or attempt a sneaking mission,
Octavio's suggestion of showing up with forged prisoner transfer documents is
the plan with the biggest chance of success here.

The book lists the requirements for forging the papers, and details an NPC
forger the group can hire if none of them are very skilled at it. Opposition
here consists of a total of eight dottari guards with the same stats as the one
encountered in Part 1, plus their slightly weird commander Warden Sabo. More
guards will show up at regular intervals if a fight breaks out.

Good forgeries and some fast-talking should get them past all of these people
and into the cells, which contain three of the four knights they're supposed to
rescue. The fourth is currently being tortured by the scalpel devil.

Oh, I didn't mention the scalpel devil? It's like a chain devil, but covered in
scalpels instead and with a host of powers to detect lies. It's in a soundproof
room deep within the prison, and even if the party tricks the guards they will
still likely end up fighting it to get the last prisoner out. The guards don't
like this thing a whole lot, and won't be in a rush to enter the soundproof room
or to ask the PCs how they got its latest victim out alive. Therefore, it's
entirely possible a particularly convincing party will talk their way into the
devil's cell, kill it, and talk their way out with all four prisoners in tow.

Getting the knights out without killing a single human guard is worth XP as if
the party had defeated the lot in combat.

## Mission 2: The Poison Pen of Kintargo

The quest giver here is Cassius Sargaeta, a captain in the Chelish navy. Not
being a Kintargo native, he's confined to his ship by Proclamation 8. Sargaeta
hasn't left town yet because his lover Marquel Aulorian (noble scion and
secretly the Poison Pen of Kintargo) is under house arrest and likely being
sought by Thrune agents for criticizing the government in his writings. Sargaeta
wants the PCs to deliver a letter to Marquel and bring him to the ship.

The PCs learn this on a meeting with the captain, after being invited into the
ship by his first mate, a sassy half-elf gunslinger. Now, it's quite likely the
PCs will be slow to trust members of the friggin' Chelish Navy, so a good amount
of this section's text is dedicated to what happens if they don't agree to see
him.

The Aulorian estate is defended by human guards who are less beefy than the
dottari, and by a three-headed hellhound. As usual, discretion is advised unless
the PCs want their notoriety increased.

Reuniting the two lovers will net the Silver Ravens a substantial reward: the
captain asks one of the PCs to drop a porcelain teacup on the floor, and
provides the Ravens with favors equal in number to the resulting shards. That's
a fancy way of saying 1d10, but the book also suggests getting an actual
(cheap!) cup and getting a player to drop it for extra effect.

It seems to me the whole deal is meant to come off as dubious until the very
end. Sargaeta is described as a "Chelish patriot" who is unhappy with Barzilai
specifically but not his government in general. His first mate is cheerfully
unpleasant, and he keeps a halfling slave as a maidservant (the adventure
doesn't spell that last bit out, but Lem's backstory is very clear that the
Chelish love enslaving halflings).

Despite all this, getting the Poison Pen to safety is a good thing for the
rebellion, and the 1d10 favors gained as a reward are _really_
valuable. Sargaeta will agree to anything short of open treason, which means he
will lend his crew for covert actions, provide discreet transport to the Ravens,
deliver a lump sum of money, and so on. If using the scene as written, the best
thing to do would be to play up the gray morality of the situation. GMs who are
uncomfortable with that or who don't believe their players would take on the
mission as written could replace Sargaeta with a more sympathetic foreign
captain.

## Mission 3: On the Slasher's Trail

The text of this mission begins with a brief bout of exposition on the Temple
Hill Slasher, a serial killer who plagued Kintargo a few decades ago and whose
killings are still part of the local folklore. In other words, a fairly obvious
Jack the Ripper expy. The main difference here is that the Slasher was
eventually caught. Only it seems like the killings have started again, using the
exactly same MO.

The rumor table at the start of adventure includes some entries dealing with
this new Slasher, and they pay off on Mission 3. The PCs are contacted by a
tiefling tailor named Hetamon Haace, who reveals he's the leader of the Rose of
Kintargo: a cult of Milani[^1] worshippers who's been laying _extremely_ low as
of late. As is often the case with these NPCs, he's fully aware of any Silver
Ravens exploits the group hasn't taken pains to conceal.

Haace feels compelled to ask the Ravens' help because a member of his own group
has been killed by the new Slasher. He wants their help in tracking the murderer
down and will offer the services of the Rose in return. This will mostly consist
in helping keep the heat off the Ravens' backs, but they will rise up and help
the fight more directly when the time comes. There's also a pair of free _boots
of levitation_ in it for the party.

The procedure for tracking down the murderer is laid down in detail: _speak with
dead_ to interrogate the latest victim, and several skill checks to interpret
the provided clues. Getting too many of these wrong is a serious concern here,
since it will mostly shut down the investigation. The book suggests having the
Slasher try to kill a friendly NPC after a few days if this happens, and have
the victim escape to provide any missing details to the group. I suggest simply
providing those details during the initial investigation to avoid killing the
group's momentum.

From a description of the suspect's appearance, attire and the smell of a
specific kind of grease that hangs about him, the book says it's possible to
deduce he's a tinkerer who rents a shop at a sort of co-working space for
cog-mongers called Vespam Artisans. The place's owner is fairly sympathetic to
the Ravens and will promptly reveal the suspect's name (Varl Wex) and where he
lives.

Wex has a room at a tenement house. Depending on how the PCs handled the
investigation up to this point, he will be either away from home when they
arrive or waiting in ambush.

The story here is that Wex came across a sentient magic kukri used by the
original Slasher, and was brainwashed by the weapon into becoming a serial
killer himself. The weapon in question and a whole lot of other incriminating
evidence are hidden in a secret room in the apartment. If Wex is out, he will
arrive during the investigation and either try to bluff his way to the
hidey-hole to retrieve the weapon, or attack at once if the PCs already found
it. If he's lying in ambush, he will strike from the secret room and try to pick
off the PCs one at a time until he's found out. Wex will fight to the death,
though he might retreat to set up sneak attacks.

Eliminating Wex is already a service to the city at large and will get the Rose
of Kintargo on the PC's side. They also have several options on how to dispose
of the body and evidence! The most interesting one is to turn them over to the
authorities, which will immensely bolster the Ravens' reputation and force
Barzilai to publicly thank the PCs for their service to preserve
appearances. They can also turn them over to a neutral party who will get the
credit for the deed if they don't want the exposure, but hey, go big or go home!

Similarly, they can hand the evil knife to one of the remaining legal "good"
temples in Kintargo and get a reward equal to its monetary value, or turn it
over to a sensible neutral party like Tiora and get half that value. Either of
these will get the artifact safely destroyed. Any other solutions carry the risk
that the weapon will make its way back to the murder cult who originally created
it, and cause future trouble for the PCs.

### Conversion Notes

Wex is statted up as a level 10 fighter/rogue, built to stack bleed effects on
his targets, which benefit from the effects of his evil weapon (see below). A
GURPS conversion should probably start from the Assassin or Thief templates,
with around 50-75 extra points spent on making him deadly with a kukri: Weapon
Master (Knives), higher ST, higher skill, and Targeted Attacks to the neck or
femoral arteries if your campaign uses that level of detail.

The evil kukri is named Balgorrah, and contains the soul of a murder cult
priest. It causes greater than normal bleeding and gives the wielder temporary
HP equal to the amount of bleeding it caused. It also tries to compel the
wielder to become a serial killer.

The GURPS version should be Fine, Balanced and Ornate (+1), and enchanted with
Weaken Blood and Steal Vitality. It should also have an IQ score and an Energy
Reserve which it can use to power its own enchantments.

## Analysis and Review

Part 2 ends right after describing the three missions above. The only mission
that's really required for moving the plot forward is Mission 1, but Mission 2
rewards the PCs with such a valuable strategic resource that I would strongly
consider replacing Captain Sargaeta with a more obviously sympathetic NPC if
your group would be disinclined to trust him as written.

Mission 3 seems to be mostly there as filler to give the PCs enough XP to hit
level 6 in time for the adventure's finale, but it's interesting enough on its
own merits that I would still keep it in my version of the adventure.

Our next article will look at Part 3, which ends this adventure with a big
dungeon raid.


[1]: {{ "/2018/10/07/hells-rebels-2-part-1.html" | relative_url }}

[^1]: Golarion's Chaotic Good goddess of rebellion.
