---
layout: post
title: "My GURPS House Rules"
tags:
    - gurps
---

As a way to get back into the habit of writing I thought I would expound a bit
on my preferred GURPS house rules. These are the modifications I make on every
campaign I GM. Some are tried-and-true, some are experimental, and one I haven't
really used yet but intend to.

None of them are original creations, though. There's so much stuff out there
already that I don't feel inclined to come up with my own stuff.

## The Permanent Fixtures

These rules should be in effect in pretty much any game I GM.

### Metric!

If I have one complaint about GURPS is that it uses Imperial measurements for
everything. I don't! I use metric instead. By now I'm pretty used to applying
simple conversions for lengths and weights.

Areas and volumes are more annoying, though I suspect [this site][1] would help
me there. I don't agree with _everything_ on it (for example, I'm not rounding
Basic Lift to the nearest whole kilogram, that's not granular enough), but it
does a good job overall.

### Alternate Guns Specialties

These are from Pyramid #3/65. It greatly simplifies the existing Guns
specialties, and I think it makes a lot of sense. I use it on any game that has
guns at all.

## Occasional Appearances

These don't always appear, but I like them nonetheless.

### Complimentary Skills

This rule originally appeared on GURPS Dungeon Fantasy 2 and GURPS Action 2, and
was restated on Pyramid #3/70. It encourages teamwork, and gives heroes a bit of
an extra edge in general. It hasn't appeared in all of my games because people
rarely think to invoke this rule, but if anyone asks whether they can use it the
answer is always "yes".

### Tactics For the Win

This originally appeared in GURPS Martial Arts. It allows the Tactics skill to
grant rerolls when not using tactical maps, or to enable tricky positioning
shenanigans when using them. It makes playing "warlord" characters mechanically
viable, and the only reason it's not a permanent fixture is that people don't
always make those types of character.

### Team Efforts

Another one from Action and Dungeon Fantasy. It simplifies group tests.

### Range Bands

This is from GURPS Action. It's a lot easier to use than the Size/Speed range
table for combats without a map! In practice it mostly means giving nearly
everyone a -3 penalty for ranged attacks and calling it a day, since combats in
my games rarely happen further away 20m that even when everyone has guns.

## Experiments, Tried and Untried

These are rules I _want_ to use more often, but I still don't feel I'm good
enough at applying them to so in every game.

### Technical Grappling, Simplified.

This is obviously from GURPS Technical Grappling. I like the basic idea of the
Technical Grappling system, but as written it's way too complex to use in any
game that is not entirely about playing through an entire MMA tournament at a
high level of detail.

I would like to keep the central mechanic where grapplers to "control damage"
according to their skill and strength, and where this damage makes it
increasingly harder for the opponent to move. Referred Control has to _go_,
however, and I strongly dislike the idea of adjusting people's ST mid-fight. I'm
also not too keep on calculating multiple ST scores for every possible
combination of limbs you're using for a grapple.

Sometimes I'm strongly tempted to buy Douglas Cole's Dungeon Grappling
supplement for D&D-alikes and port it back to GURPS, since it seems to do lot of
what I described above already. However, now that I've discovered that the
[official GURPS conversion of his Hall of Tyr adventure][2] is real, I'll
probably wait for that instead. In the meantime I might work something out on my
own.

### Hybrid Ritual Path Magic

I'm a big fan of the Ritual Path Magic system as described in, well, GURPS
Ritual Path Magic. I like the energy accumulation model and the flexibility it
allows. That book is more geared towards settings where magic is rare and/or
hidden, though, which means it tends to limit magic by what is "mundanely
possible" in the setting in question. You can exceed those limits with Greater
effects, but it's expensive.

GURPS Dungeon Fantasy 19: Incantation Magic describes a variant of this system
meant to fit a D&D-like setting, where magic is known and common. The limits it
imposes are a lot less fuzzy (you can do _this_ much damage, or give _this_ big
a bonus). The exact amounts are dependent on Magery and there are no Greater
effects that allow you to exceed them. That's good for my purposes, but
unfortunately the system is based on an "effect shaping" model where spells give
you more skill penalties the more powerful they are.

What I want here is a hybrid system, one that's based on energy but also geared
towards obvious-magic settings. What I'd do here is basically use the system
from RPM with the Magery-based limits from DF, and the removal of Greater
effects. I haven't tested this in actual play with real players, but I would
like to.


[1]: http://bignose.whitetree.org/projects/gurps/house-rules.devel/gurps-metric.xhtml
[2]: http://www.sjgames.com/ill/archive/April_01_2018/Announcing_Hall_of_Judgment_for_Dungeon_Fantasy_RPG
