---
layout: post
title: "Review: Dragon Heresy Introductory Set"
image: /assets/dragon-heresy-is-cover.png
tags:
    - dnd
    - dragon-heresy
    - review
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/dragon-heresy-is-cover.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2018 Gaming Ballistic LLC
    <a href="//www.kickstarter.com/projects/2101297466/the-dragon-heresy-introductory-set-fantasy-rpg">
      (image source)
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The **Dragon Heresy Introductory Set** is a book written by Douglas Cole and
published by his company, Gaming Ballistic LLC. Mr. Cole has long been a
freelancer for Steve Jackson Games, and he has to his name books such as GURPS
Martial Arts, GURPS Technical Grappling and several others. I've been following
his blog, also called Gaming Ballistic, for quite a while now.

The **Introductory Set** is the company's latest offering, and it's [Kickstarter
campaign][2] is just wrapping up. As far as KS campaigns go, it was quite
successful: it got the money it needed, hit some cool stretch goals, and is set
to deliver on time. I expect the finished product will be availabe on the store
before the end of this month.

Having read my preliminary backer copy, I will endeavor to give you my
impressions of it.

## TL; DR

**Dragon Heresy** might be the first iteration of D&D Fifth Edition that doesn't
put me to sleep. From now on, I will always be a bit sad when I play vanilla 5th
edition because I could be playing **Dragon Heresy** instead.

## On the Book Itself

The mostly-final PDF of **The Dragon Heresy Introductory Set** I have in front
of me is around 285 pages long - the final book will have 288, so this is just
missing the covers and perhaps a page or two of editorial information. People
who backed it at a higher level than I did will also get a luxurious hardcover
version (an offset print run was one of the stretch goals they achieved).

The book contains everything you need to play the game from levels 1 to 5, from
basic die-rolling concepts to character creation, rules for lots of common
situations and large catalogues of spells and monsters. You can see that all of
this was taken from the as-yet-unpublished full game, since there are hints
about higher-level stuff left here and there, but the text is
self-contained. The hints act mostly as teasers of what the future might bring.

Layout-wise, the text is reminiscent of the official D&D books at a first look,
but all the graphical elements on the page are specific to Dragon Heresy. The
body font is a workable serif face, and the titles manage to be both
fancy-looking and readable. The art that is already there is quite good
overall. Several artists worked on this book, and their styles are usually
dissimilar enough to be noticeable, but not enough to make the book look
inconsistent.

The writing is generally clear, and occasionally sprinkled with the same
delightful bits of humor you can find in **GURPS Dungeon Fantasy** supplements,
which for me is always a plus.

Last, but not least, this thing has an table of contents and index comparable to
those of a GURPS. This is high praise: no one, and I mean _no one_ publishes
books that are as well-indexed as those of GURPS. The PDF also contains links in
its text, which further helps referencing related concepts.

## On Player Characters

Core mechanics and character creation options take up roughly the first 50 pages
of the book. The basic mechanics are what you'd expect from any SRD 5.1 game:
ability checks, advantage/disadvantage, and so on.

Character creation uses a set of three different number arrays. The player
chooses one and assigns the numbers to the character's abilities. As the author
says, people who really want to roll 4d6-drop-lowest or even 3d6-in-order
already know how to do it by heart.

The available races are Humans, Dwarves, Dragonborn, Half-Elves and
Tieflings. None of them are what you'd expect from reading the names alone, and
all of them get a detailed overview of their culture. Humans are basically
ethnically diverse vikings. Dwarves look like they're made of stone and have a
stronger bond to their craft guild than to their biological family. Dragonborn
can look like anything from humans with a bit of a skin condition to barely
humanoid lizard-people, and have a history as former slaves of the Elder
Dragons. Half-Elves and tieflings, in an interesting reversal of the cliche, are
generally _well-liked_ by others wherever they go, having innate bonuses to
Charisma as they do.

You can't play a full-blooded elf, because this is a Norse-inpired setting and
full-blooded Norse elves are scary.

Class-wise, you have the Berserker (a renamed Barbarian), the Skald (a renamed
Bard) plus Fighters, Clerics and Wizards. The basic rules for each are pretty
much the same as in standard D&D, but their class options contain some
interesting novelty. Berserkers who don't just want to rage harder at 3rd level
can choose to either channel rune magic or become monsters at
grappling. Fighters can get what I think might be the best Warlord-like
abilities I've ever seen in 5th edition material, and can start at first level
with a fighting style that makes them Valkyrie-good at spear-fighting. Skalds,
Clerics and Wizards also get their own flavorful options.

No rogues in this book, which is kind of appropriate as both the historical
Norse and the people of Torengar consider theft to be dishonorable. The
honorable thing to do is to _first_ kill them, _then_ take their stuff.

You also get a small selection of setting appropriate backgrounds, which segue
into an interesting set of rules for social standing. The more lavish your
lifestyle and the more expensive your bling, the more pull you have in Torengur
society.

## On the Setting

**Dragon Heresy** has its own setting: the Norse-inspired kingdom of Torengar,
located in the world of Etera. The text takes pains to emphasize the _inspired_
bit, and that you shouldn't expect the setting to rigorously match real
historical Norse facts, but you can still see that quite a bit of research went
into it.

The wider cosmology is based on Norse myth: you have Yggdrasil and its Nine
Realms, but there are several differences that are caused both by the need to
bring this a bit closer to a D&D-ish arrangement and by the setting's specific
history. The latter are the most interesting.

For example, Jotunheim is inhabited by _dragons_, not giants. Giants used to
live here at the beginning of time, but the dragons kicked them out. Alfheim was
similarly changed by ancient historical events. These details make me feel like
this is a post-Ragnarok world even though the Aesir are still kicking around.

The Aesir themselves are slightly changed from what you'd expect from reading up
on Norse myth. Of the "main cast", Freya and Frigga have been mashed up into a
single deity (Valfreya), and several of the others go by names that as far as I
know are historical, but not as popular in the present-day real world. Woden,
Donnar, and such. There are also a whole bunch of other Aesir who don't normally
get top billing in Marvel movies but which play an important part in the lives
of the people of Torengar.

The ancient history of Etera is dominated by a long war between the Winter Fae
and the Elder Dragons, which ended when a Fae faction performed a desperate
magical ritual of apocalyptic proportions that pretty much shattered both
empires and allowed their former slaves to spread out and form many smaller,
squabbling kingdoms. A few centuries ago, the dwarves of the island of Barakthel
began exerting their influence on the neighboring lands to make them a bit more
stable, resulting in the current political map.

Most Introductory Set adventures take place in Torengar, the most viking-like
kingdom of Etera, or in the neighboring land of Tanalor where most of the
ancient Fae and Dragon ruins are. There are other kingdoms that take more after
other real-world cultures and which the Torengur love to trade with and/or raid,
but they aren't given much emphasis here. I imagine the full three-book set
would have more on them.

Overall the setting as presented in the Introductory Set is quite gameable, and
comes with plenty of advice and general hooks for creating adventures. It's
certainly a lot more flavorful than the Forgotten Realms the official 5th
edition books stick to.

## On the New Mechanics

I've touched upon this a tiny bit when describing the character creation
options, but **Dragon Heresy** has a lot of new and interesting mechanics that,
in my eyes, turn D&D 5th edition from the flavorless substrate of generic
fantasy roleplaying into something interesting in its own right.

The most obvious change is that it ditches Armor Class and Hit Points in favor
of a new Vigor/Wounds system. No, this isn't the _first_ wounds system in
roleplaying: Star Wars d20 tried something similar, and any Brazilian readers
will know Tagmar did it a decade before Star Wars d20. This is, however, one
of the _best-executed_ wounds system I've ever seen.

Your hit dice give you _Vigor_ points, which explicitly represent your ability
to protect yourself from harm via weapon parries, shield blocks or plain
dodging. You gain more Vigor when you level up, and recover lost Vigor by
resting (much like HP in vanilla D&D). You don't take Vigor damage - you _spend_
vigor to avoid taking _Wounds_. Wounds are serious business. They take days or
weeks to heal without magic, and taking Wounds can seriously impair your
character long before they're at death's door.

Instead of a single Armor Class value, characters have a relatively low Threat
DC and a higher Hit DC. If an enemy beats your Threat DC, it means they will hit
you _unless_ you actively defend yourself by spending Vigor. Beating your Hit DC
means they bypassed all of your defenses. Avoiding injury from that takes a
"frantic defense", which among other things costs your reaction for the round.

Armor no longer makes you harder to hit - instead, it provides damage resistance
that reduces the amount of Wounds (_not_ Vigor) you take from an attack. Shields
_do_ make you harder to hit, and you need a shield to be able to defend yourself
normally from arrow fire or certain similar spells.

On top of this there's grappling. **Dragon Heresy** uses a version of the
grappling system introduced in **Dungeon Grappling**, where attempts to grapple
an enemy cause Control Damage and enemies are more impaired the more Control has
been applied to them. You can also turn control directly into wounds, which
isn't as efficient as just stabbing your enemy but is better than trying to
punch them barehanded.

I quite like these systems! You can kinda see the influence from GURPS here -
spending Vigor is the equivalent of making active defense rolls, and Dungeon
Grappling was of course inspired by Technical Grappling. These rules do a good
job of putting the age-old "hit points versus meat points" debate to rest.

Aside from these combat mechanics, there are other interesting additions. The
social standing system was already discussed earlier, and there is also a simple
system for Flyting, which is a ritualized contest of insults that was practiced
by Norse. Yes, apparently social combat was a thing in the real world.

## Conclusion

If you have any interest at all in the mechanic changes I summarized above, then
you should definitely get this book. This goes double if you like vikings! This
is only an introductory set, but the new mechanics and the setting could easily
be transplanted into a game based on the vanilla SRD. The only thing you'd be
missing are the new character options beyond level 5.


[1]: https://gamingballistic.com/shop/
[2]: https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2101297466/the-dragon-heresy-introductory-set-fantasy-rpg
