---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: More Aboleths"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---


{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/mm4e-aboleth.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


If you're following this series mostly through Octopus Carnival, you might not
know I'm posting it on the RPG.net forums as well. The [Aboleth][1] entry
sparked some discussion over there, and someone told me there were a few more
aboleths detailed in Dungeon Magazine 170. Since I have that issue with me, I
took a small detour to talk about those aboleths before moving on to the next
Monster Manual entry.

_City of Aboleths_ was published in Dungeon 170, which came out in
September 2009. Despite the grandiose name, it's not actually a adventure, just
a pair of combat encounters and a skill challenge. Written by Bruce R. Cordell,
it's a tie-in for a Forgotten Realms novel, also by Cordell.


## The Lore

Yes, there's more aboleth lore here. There's the classic bit about each aboleth
containing the racial memory of its whole lineage, which is always welcome. They
don't die of old age and never stop growing, which is nifty.

Then there's a bit about how they're all p-zombies without a sense of self, and
another about there being a city called Xxiphu which is the oldest aboleth
settlement filled with all sorts of special "superior" aboleth and ruled by the
oldest aboleth ever. Both of these I'm willing to discard as being novel tie-in
dross.

## The Numbers

The new monsters from this adventure are all those special "superior" aboleths
from the novel. All except the hatchlings have a _fly speed_ of 8 in addition to
their land and swim speeds, and instead of the plain old Mucus Haze each gets a
specialized "haze" aura. The increased damage their tentacles do to dazed
targets has been separated into an ability called Mind Bore, which deals psychic
damage when the aboleth hits a dazed or dominated target with a tentacle. These
are the new monsters:

First we have the **Aboleth Hatchling**, a Small level 16 Minion Skirmisher. It
appears aboleths are born with Int 15 and an evil alignment, due to the weight
of all those memories. Their tentacle attack does increased damage to dazed
targets, as usual, and their haze is an Aura 1 that causes a _cumulative_ -2
penalty to saves against daze or domination. Yes, if you're surrounded by 4
hatchlings you get a -8 penalty to your saves.

The **Aboleth Suffocator** is a level 16 lurker with 124 HP. Its tentacles daze,
and it has a recharge 3-6 psychic blast called a Brain Lash that also does
ongoing 5 psychic damage. When damaged, it turns into a pillar of slime which
can't attack, counts as insubstantial and can shift its full speed. The
suffocator can end this as a free action, so it's useful for repositioning. Its
mucus aura gives enemies caught in it a -2 penalty to defenses and saving
throws. Fight a suffocator and a bunch of hatchlings and you're going to dang
well _stay_ dazed.

The **Aboleth Perceptor** is a level 17 soldier with 168 HP. Its mucus aura
allows it to ignore all concealment and partial cover when attacking anyone in
the aura. The tactics text says the aura also works for its _allies_, but the
stat block disagrees with that. The perceptor's tentacles pull the target 3
squares and mark it, and it also has an Eye of Madness ranged psychic attack
(recharge 5-6) that dazes and marks. Anyone who flouts the mark gets punished by
a psychic blast that also makes them vulnerable to further psychic
damage. Lastly, the perceptor can shift 5 squares to chase marked targets, as a
move action (recharge 5-6).

The **Aboleth Behemoth** is a Huge level 19 Elite Controller with 362 HP. Its
mucus haze works as usual and gives enemies in it a further -2 penalty to saves
against daze and domination while the behemoth is bloodied. It makes 2 or 3
tentacles attack per turn, each of which grabs and dazes on a hit. Twice per
fight it can whip its tentacles around to hit everyone on a close burst 3 and
slide them 3 squares. Its Mind Bore deals ongoing 10 psychic damage instead of
just increasing the damage of a single attack by that amount. It also has
threatening reach, allowing it to make opportunity attacks against people up to
3 squares away. It fights much like its less special cousin, the Lasher, only it
takes up more space.

And lastly, we have the **Aboleth Master**, which doesn't appear in the provided
encounters and is probably meant to be the "Eldest" aboleth everyone in the
novel is so intent on killing. It's a level 22 Elite Controller with 418 HP. Its
haze makes enemies take a -2 penalty to Will against charm and psychic attacks,
and pretty much all of its attacks are psychic. It has the Overseer's Dominate,
and Enslave, and can command dominated targets to use any power against their
friends, not just at-will ones like usual. Its Mind Bore does ongoing damage,
and it has a couple of neat tricks it can use as minor actions. Body Puppet is a
ranged attack that does psychic damage and slides the target 5 squares, but
ironically it targets Fortitude and so doesn't benefit from the master's own
aura. Mind Snap does target will, and also dazes.

Fun fact: _all_ new aboleth here have a lower Int than the ones from the Monster
Manual. Even the epic Master has an Int of 22, smaller than the 23 of its
supposedly "inferior" brethren. The Behemoth has a 5.

## Final Impressions

These monsters bring increased variety to an all-aboleth dungeon, but there's an
air of "these are from my novel so they're extra-special" that bothers me a
little. Giving _all_ aboleths a fly speed would be worth it just to see the look
on the player's faces, though. The complementary haze auras thing could also
work well.

Still, there are a few weird things here, mostly the stuff that penalizes
saves. I've yet to see that anywhere else. There's also the perceptor's aura
doing one thing in the stat block and another in the description, and the
master's aura not helping one of its own powers.

The two provided encounters are level 18, and take place in an "egg cyst", a
cave lined with aboleth eggs and their hibernating guardians. The article
recommends adding it as a "side chamber" in a larger Underdark-themed
adventure.

The first encounter happens as the party enters the cyst and consists of the
classic combo of 2 Aboleth Lashers and 1 Aboleth Slime Mage, only this time they
have an entourage of 15 Aboleth Hatchlngs. The second one happens after they
cross a stream in the middle of the egg cyst, which wakes up 2 Suffocators, one
Behemoth and one Overseer from hibernation. If the PCs wade in the stream while
fighitng the first group, it _will_ trigger the second, making them fight
against two encounters at once. I've had that happen with other monsters in my
own adventures, and it was always loads of fun... for me!


[1]: {{ "/2019/01/04/aboleth.html" | absolute_url }}
