---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Immolith"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class=left>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-immolith.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Illustration Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast.</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Every time you kill a demon, its soul is sent screaming back to the Abyss, where
it will eventually reincarnate as a new demon. However, sometimes the process
goes wrong, and a bunch of demon souls bump into each other on the way to the
Abyss and fuse into a big clump. This katamari of evil can't reincarnate
properly, and instead rises as an undead demon. And this is how immoliths are
made!

Immoliths look like pillars of fire topped by a demonic skull. Many different
skeletal limbs emerge from their flames, likely belonging to the original demons
that make it up. As undead demons, their hate of the living is double-plus-big,
and they're as likely to be found alongside powerful undead like liches and
vampires as they are with other demons. They're only statted up in the Monster
Manual.

Immoliths are Large Elemental Magical Beasts (demon, fire, undead), and Level 15
Controllers with 153 HP and defenses a point or two lower than what you'd
expect. Interestingly, they lack darkvision, but I imagine that's not needed
when you're walking bonfire.

Immoliths are immune to fire, disease and poison. They have Variable Resistance
15 (switchable once per encounter), and Radiant Vulnerability 10. The intense
heat emanating from their bodies works as an Aura 1 that deals 10 fire damage to
anyone starting their turns within it.

Their basic attack is a Reach 4 claw that does both immediate and ongoing fire
damage. Instead of that they can use a Fiery Grab against Large or smaller
targets. This combines the claw attack with a grab that pulls the victim
adjacent to the immolith (and into its aura). The demon can grab up to five
creatures this way, and while they're grabbed they lose any resistance they have
to fire. Did you think you were safe just because you were a tiefling, fire
genasi or fire sorcerer?

As a minor action, the immolith can inflict a Deathfire Curse on someone as a
Ranged 10 attack that targets Will. On a hit the target is slowed (save ends),
and after they save from that they'll take ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).

Also as a minor action, though only once per round, it can restore 5 HP to all
undead in a Close Burst 5, including itself.

It's not inconceivable that one of these could have the entire party grabbed and
taking ongoing fire damage from their aura. People who try to run would be
slowed by the Deathfire Curse, and likely by the immolith's buddies.

The sample encounter is level 14: one immolith, 2 vrocks, 4 mezzodemons, and 6
horde ghouls. Since it appears both mezzodemons and vrocks have means to limit a
character's mobility, my analysis above checks out.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
