---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels Adventure 2: Lucky Bones"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/350px-Hell's_Rebels_Logo.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

Time to finally end Turn of the Torrent! When we last left off, we had just
finished exploring level 1 of the complex under the Lucky Bones casino. Now it's
time to descend to level 2.

## Lucky Bones: Lower Basement

This is a literal dungeon! It's here that the Spiders kept their captives while
waiting to ransom them or sell them into slavery.

The most important thing about the Lower Basement is that it's almost completely
flooded, and will remain so until the PCs clear it. The _ring of swimming_ from
Adventure 1 and _cloak of the manta ray_ from level 1 of this same dungeon will
surely be useful, though in the end the whole party needs a way to breathe
underwater if they want to venture here.

Potions and scrolls of _water breathing_ are available in the open market in
Kintargo, and if Octavio is in friendly terms with the PCs he might ask the
seers back at the Shrine of Saint Senex for their _wands of wather
breathing_. Once that's taken care of, the party still needs to mind the many
combat penalties they'll get against this level's aquatic denizens.

Things get a bit more expensive in Dungeon Fantasy, since its water breathing
spell has a duration in the scale of minutes instead of hours. A wizard who
happens to have learned it at skill 20 could keep it on indefinitely on
themselves. They'd need skill 25 to cover the whole party.

Item-wise, there's an alchemical amulet of water breathing in **DFRPG Magic
Items** that costs $23.400 and works for as long as it's worn. If your party
isn't rich enough to buy one for each PC, you could introduce a more
reasonably-priced alternative that only lasts for about as long as the
Pathfinder potion.

Opposition in this level is a band of skum spies sent here by an aboleth
necromancer to spy on Kintargo. The aboleth doesn't have any designs on the
city, it's just sending spies on general principle. The skum "foot soldiers" are
led by the wizard Ungol-Pagh, and either brought or befriended a bunch of other
sea monsters to act as guards down here. They've also captured a group of sea
elf rangers who came in here to search for their missing ally, the opera singer
Shensen (who vanished in the initial Thrune purges before Adventure 1 started).

Here's our condensed room key:

**D1. Flooded Warehouse**: Completely submerged in cold and still but mostly
clear water. Large square stone pillars, a pile of algae-caked rubble. Five skum
lounge here and will likely see the PCs as soon as they come in. They attack on
sight and fight to the death[^1]. Secret passage in a hollow pillar leads to D2
and requires a very hard Perception check to find. Obvious exit to D8 and up the
well back to C16. If the party leaves, any surviving skum relocate to D8.

**D2. Hidden Passageway**: Accessible from secret door in D1. Corridor with
stairs that rise out of the water and lead to D3.

**D3. Vault Door:** Accessible from D2. This area is above the water
level. Large iron door with a fiendish (pun intended) combination lock that
requires three hard lockpicking tests to open. Failure triggers a large blade
trap embedded in the door that attacks the intruder for a boatload of cutting
damage. The skeletal corpse of Guildmaster Baccus lies at the foot of the door
(he fumbled the combination).

Baccus wears several magic items, which we'll look at in detail later. He also
clutches three keys to the chests inside the vault, and carries a fragment of a
devil-summoning book[^2] containing a word that can cause great pain to the
drowning devil on this level of the dungeon.

**D4. Gray Vault:** Accessible from D3. Three heavy iron chests; skeleton of a
human woman with eight spidery legs protuding from her back. The locks on the
chests are even harder to open than the ones on the vault door, but Baccus'
corpse has the keys.

The skeleton belongs to the vault's former guardian, a jorogumo from Tian
Xia[^3]. It's inert and harmless, but serves as foreshadowing for the next
adventure. The chests contain quite a bit of money and loot, as well as a couple
of cursed surprises. We'll look at them in detail below, but bear in mind that
some of the cursed items may alert the surviving Gray Spider leader that her old
lair has been breached.

**D5. Shells and Pillories.** Accessible from D1. Low ceiling, completely
flooded. Whiping posts, rusty empty cages, well leading to D11, doorway leading
to D6, secret door leading to D7. Two piles of shells in this room are actually
a pair of Shell Sentinels, amorphous seashell golems who animate and attack any
intruders (meaning any non-skum).

**D6. Acisazi Prisoners.** Accessible from D5. Completely flooded. Several
cells, currently containing a five person squad of sea elf rangers from the
Acisazi tribe. If freed and given equipment, they will gladly help the PCs clear
this level. They're weaker than the PCs, but work well underwater and are
valuable as support. The party gains XP for each elf who survives to the end of
the adventure.

The elves came here looking for Shensen's help against an aboleth wizard
threatening their village - the same wizard who sent the skum here. Helping the
village is an excellent way to gain outside support for the Silver Ravens, and
is covered in the next adventure.

The PCs have about two weeks from the moment they enter the level to rescue the
elves. It's unlikely they'll take that long, but at the end of this time the
prisoners are taken away to be turned into more slaves for the aboleth.

**D7. Pump Room.** Accessible through secret door in D5. The skum know about
this door. Completely flooded. Contains a huge, broken magical pump. Repairing
the pump will take three days, some money and the services of a skilled
enchanter (like Hetamon Haace). It also requires recovering a missing part from
room D10.

Once repaired, the pump will drain areas D1-D9 and D12. Fixing it gives the
party a large XP award and is one of the main goals in the adventure, after
clearing this level.

**D8. Smuggler's Cave.** Accessible from D1. Completely flooded. A cave with a
submerged dock. Four skum lounge here with two trained reefclaws. Any survivors
from D1 will retreat here as well. An alarm spell will go off as soon as the PCs
enter from D1, alerting the skum leader in D12.

Reefclaws look like lobsters with eel backsides. They attack with grabby
poisonous claws and constriction.

Also here are two watertight barrels containing still-functional _bottles of
air_.

**D9. Sewer Access.** Accessible from D8. Small submerged cave, tunnel leads
off the map and into a Kintargo sewer. Guarded by a devilfish in league with the
skum. A devilfish is a sapient (but stupid) seven-armed octopus the size of a
horse that attacks with tentacles, a bite, and a cloud of poisonous
blood.

**D10. Pump Valves.** Accessible from D8. Completely submerged. Several pipes
with magical valves connect to the pump in D7. One of the pipes is missing a
valve, pried out by the skum and currently in possession of their leader in D12.

**D11. Disposal Cave.** Accessible from D10 or from well in D5. Completely
submerged cave, walls encrusted with filth and sludge, huge pile of refuse in
the center beneath the well. The refuse pile is the nest of an advanced globster
whom the skum have been feeding. It investigates any noises and attacks if not
immediately fed, fighting to the death.

A globster is a huge, blubbery underwater ooze. This one is particularly huge
and blubbery.

**D12. Observation Post.** Accessible from D8 or from secret passage in
D13. Underwater cave, walls partly covered with glowing lichen. The leader of
the skum, a skum wizard named Ungol-Pagh, carves notes about his spying on the
walls for future reference and attacks the PCs as soon as he becomes aware of
them.

Ungol-Pagh is a level 7 wizard, meaning he's slightly stronger than a PC wizard
would be at this point. He has lots of charm and paralysis spells, plus a wand
of _lightning bolt_ with 12 charges, which is surely the thing you want to have
when fighting underwater.

**D13. River Access.** Accessible from D8. Underwater cave links to a river
outside Kintargo, and is guarded by a drowning devil originally summoned by
Guildmaster Baccus. The devil summoning text found on Baccus' corpse in D3
contains a word that causes this devil great pain. The devil is currently
aligned with the skum, whose leader promised to find a way to free it from its
binding.

Drowning devils have this name because they like to drown others. They're Large,
look like four-armed eels, are fully amphibious, and have all sorts of
waterbending powers that make them oodles of Fun (TM) to fight underwater.

### The Loot

The magic items on Baccus are a _+2 mithral chain shirt_, a _handy haversack_
full of money, a _+1 lawful outsider bane mithral dagger_, and a _ring of
protection +2_. I guess this is officially the point where the PCs are supposed
to upgrade to +2-tier gear. And that dagger is a handy weapon against devils!

The first chest in the vault contains a whole lot of money. The second a whole
bunch of potions and poisons, including a vial of oil of life distilled from the
Philosopher's Stone[^4]. And the third has a bunch of magic items: _cloak of
elvenkind_, _folding boat_, _wand of alter self_ with 23 charges. The cursed
objects mentioned earlier are also in this chest: a set of _prisoner's dungeon
rings_, and a _robe of powerlesslness_ disguised as a _robe of bones_.

When someone puts one of those rings on, the wearer of the _jailer's dungeon
ring_ that completes the set will instanly become aware of their location and
status. That wearer is Hei Fen, the last surviving Gray Spider, who will deduce
from this that her old hideout has been breached. I don't know what a _robe of
bones_ is supposed to do, but it doesn't really matter because what this robe
actually does is act as a wearable No Mana/No Sanctity zone. Once worn, both
the rings and the robe can only be removed by magic like Remove Curse.

The skum wizard has the already mentioned wand of lightning bolts, plus a
_headband of intellect +2_, _amulet of natural armor +1_, and a _lesser extend
metamagic rod_.

## Delving the Dungeon

Stealth is almost impossible here, just as it was in the cultist hideout on
level 1. There's a bunch of skum right by the entrance, and it looks like any
sounds of combat would carry well enough under water to attract the attention of
anyone nearby.

The "brutal raid" approach is the only viable one, at least as I see it. The
most logical response for the skum when they first see the party is for the
level's whole contingent to converge on the intruders! Here is how things will
likely play out:

- PCs arrive on D1, the five skum there start a fight.

- The four skum on D8 notice the fight almost immediately, as there's no barrier
  between the two rooms. Three of them plus their two pet reefclaws join the
  fight immediately, one runs to warn Ungol-Pagh. Depending on how you judge
  things, this _could_ be accomplished by manually triggering the alarm spell,
  which reduces the wizard's response time a bit.

- Ungol-Pagh runs towards the fight as soon as he's finished buffing himself,
  arriving in a few rounds.

The skum are all fanatics who fight to the death, so there's no reason for them
to retreat and turtle up, save perhaps to lure the party to one of the other
monsters.

I don't think any of the other monsters on the level would leave their
territories to fight in room D1, but that still leaves the PCs facing down nine
skum soldiers, two reefclaws, and Ungol-Pagh. If they're really efficient they
might turn this into a fight against three distinct waves of enemies, but this
is likely to become one big subaquatic furball.

Well-prepared PCs could still take all the enemies here in one go, particularly
if they're Dungeon Fantasy delvers, but now I see why some of the text expects
the PCs to retreat and take multiple tries to clear this level.

Clearing the skum and their allied monsters out of level 2 makes it possible for
the PCs to fix the pump and make the place habitable to air-breathers
again. Unless the party takes a serious beating from the defenses in this level,
they should also clear it in time to rescue the aquatic elf rangers, which gives
them a direct lead to the next adventure in the path.

That's it for the final dungeon in Turn of the Torrent! The next post is going
to look at what the PCs likely accomplished in the adventure as a whole, and the
consequences of it.

[1]: {{ "/projects/hells-rebels.html" | relative_url }}


[^1]: I've used these words as a joke before, but this is a literal quote from
    the book.

[^2]: Creatively titled "The Book of the Damned".

[^3]: Golarion's "Oriental Adventures"-land.

[^4]: I couldn't find out what that does, but it probably works as a
    resurrection spell of some sort.
