---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Bear"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
image: /assets/wir-mm-4e-bear.png
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-bear.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Cave bear (left) and Dire Bear (right). Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

We have bears in the real world, so they don't require much in the way of
introduction. D&D has always included a variety of bears in its bestiaries,
their various real-world species lending themselves well to the "pallette swap"
approach preferred by its older editions.

After going through a few Monster Manual-only entries, we finally arrive at one
that exists in both books. The Monster Vault has an appendix with stats for
mundane animals, likely a response to complaints from traditionalist players
that the original Monster Manuals didn't include any.

But wait! If the Monster Manual doesn't have anything on mundane animals, what
does it say about bears? Let's find out.

## The Lore

They're bears. Large, omnivorous, inhabit temperate or colder areas. I wasn't
aware of it until recently, but it appears the "Bear Lore" entry in the Monster
Manual is kind of a running joke among 4e players. It's structured just like the
lore entries for weirder monsters, so it ends up telling us a PC needs to
succeed at a DC 20 Nature check to know that bears attack with their
claws.

IIRC, while real-life bears can be dangerous, they usually don't go out of their
way to attack humans, so most bear encounters will be peaceful. Of course, this
being D&D, you can encounter some bears that don't exist in real life and that
are far more ornery.

## The Numbers

Combining the two books gives us three different bears: a mundane Bear (MV), a
Cave Bear (MM), and the ever spiky Dire Bear (both). All are Unaligned natural
beasts and have Int 2.

The **Bear** likely represents a brown bear. It's Large, and a Level 5 Brute
with 80 HP. It attacks with its claws, and can use a Bear Grab about twice per
fight (it recharges when the bear is bloodied). This allows it to make two claw
attacks against the same target, and if either one hits the target drops prone
and the bear grabs it _if it has fewer than two creatures grabbed_. This ain't
no normal bear hug. At the start of the bear's turn, it deals automatic damage
against any creatures it has grabbed.

The **Cave Bear** is meant to represent a species that's extinct in our
world. It's a Level 6 Elite Brute with 170 HP, but for some reason it's only
Medium. It's more of a striker than a grappler: aside from its claws, it has a
Cave Bear Frenzy that does claw damage in a Close Burst 1 and recharges on a
5-6. That's a bit less multi-strike ability than I'd expect from an elite
monster, but not too much less.

The **Dire Bear** follows the "bigger and spikier" theme set for dire animals in
Third Edition. The Monster Vault version is merely an update of the Monster
Manual, so I recommend using that one in all cases. It's a Large Natural Beast
and a Level 11 Elite Brute. Its basic attack are its claws, but it will rarely
use that. The Dire Bear's real go-to ability is Maul, which is at-will and
allows it to make two claw attacks. If both hit the same target, the bear grabs
the target if it has fewer than two creatures grabbed. This grab requires a
secondary attack in the MM version, but not in the MV one. The bear can also use
a standard action to deal lots of automatic damage to a grabbed creature (that's
where you use its action point).

Suggested encounters in the MM are: Level 6, two cave bears and one bugbear
strangler ("us bears gotta stick together!"); and level 11, 1 dire bear, 1 ettin
spirit-talker, and 3 ogre minions.

## Final Impressions.

Well, they're bears. While there's nothing terribly exciting about them
lore-wise, they do their job mechanically (particularly the Monster Vault
variants).

One thing that might be fun is to have an evil druid as a villain, using charmed
bears to do his bidding. Have the party be on the receiving end of the
Aggressively Hegemonizing Ursine Swarm for once.
