---
layout: post
title: "Where I Read the 4e Monster Manual: Angels"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---

This article is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

In a substantial change from monsters bearing the same name the past, Fourth
Edition angels have winged humanoid upper bodies (with "feminine or masculine
features"), and their lower bodies trail off into flowing energy. Many believe
they were created by the gods, but the truth is they arose from the stuff of the
Astral Sea when that plane first came into existence. If this process was
started by the gods, it was entirely unconscious.

When the gods went to war against the Primordials, the angels pledged their
service to the deities that most closely matched their individual beliefs. You
see, Angels are a rather diverse lot, with a listed alignment of "Any". So yeah,
Tiamat and Gruumsh have evil angels on their payroll. You can even find angels
working as mercenaries, serving people whose causes they find agreeable and who
can meet their price.

Angels are the first MM monster to also show up on the _Monster Vault_, where
the lore was changed to make then mostly mercenaries who only ocasionally join
up with specific gods in a more definitive manner. Here they're Unaligned and
make being as generic as possible in looks and personality a point of
pride. Personally, I prefer the Monster Manual version with additional
embelishments you can see in Final Impressions, below.

Angels are usually paragon-tier, and are more involved in the world (and more
likely to meet PCs) than deities or exarchs. They have quite a few signature
abilities:

- Flight (obviously!)
- Immunity to fear
- Resist 10 Radiant
- Angelic Presence: all attacks against the angel take a -2 penalty while it's
  not bloodied.

Below are the four angels we get in the Monster Manual, all of which reappear in
the Monster Vault.

## Angel of Battle

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/mm-4e-angel-of-battle.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Angels of Battle are military leaders. They most commonly lead angels of valor
(below) into battle, but sometimes also lead mortal forces. When gods send
angels of battle to deal with a situation, they're not interested in
dialogue. It looks like it's made of flowing silver, with metallic wings.

The Angel of Battle is a Level 15 Skirmisher Leader. It has 148 HP, with a
slighly weaker Reflex and a slighter stronger Will than what is average for
their level. It's pretty fast, with a ground speed of 8 and a flight speed
of 12.

Its basic attack is with a falchion. It'll mostly use that through Mobile Melee
Attack, which allows it to move half its speed (so, up to 6 squares) and attack
at any point in the movement without provoking attacks of opportunity for moving
away. Hitting with an attack allows it to mark the target as a Chosen Foe, which
means it will grant combat advantage to _everyone_ until the end of the angel's
next turn. In an emergency, the angel can forcefully eject the metal feathers of
its wings in a Storm of Blades, which does high damage in a Close Burst 3 and
cuts its fly speed down to 2 until the end of the fight.

The Monster Vault version is almost identical, with the only difference aside
from the fixed damage being that the effect of Chosen Foe was rolled up into the
description of the falchion attack.

So here you have an opponent who keeps flying around just outside of melee reach
and swooping down to harass the PCs and mark priority targets for its buddies to
attack. It pairs well with enemies that exploit from Combat Advantage.

The sample encounter is level 15, an all-angel party with an Angel of Battle
leading two Angels of Protection and 8 Angel of Valor minions. I guess they
could be part of the guard contingent for an evil god's temple, or maybe a hit
squad sent by an evil god against a level 12 or 13 party the god sees as an
obstacle to their plans.

## Angel of Protection

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/mm-4e-angel-of-protection.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These are basically Angelic Knights Templar, serving as bodyguards for important
faithful and protecting temples. It has fluffy feathered wings and wears golden
plate.

They're level 14 Soldiers, with 141 HP. Their Reflex and Will are a couple of
points below average, and it's a bit slower than the Angel of Battle with "speed
6, fly 8". In addition to the standard Angelic Presence, it has the Angelic
Shield aura, which makes the 5 squares around it difficult terrain for enemies
if the angel's ward is also inside the aura and Angelic Presence is active.

What's this about the angel's ward? Yeah, an Angel of Protection can designate
another creature as its ward as a standard action. Wards that remain within 5
squares of the angel get a +2 to AC and take only half damage from all attacks,
with the angel taking the other half. The angel itself fights with a greatsword
that does added radiant damage.

A given creature can only be the ward of one angel at a time, so encounter
groups with more than one of these angels should probably either contain
multiple "principals", or you could set up a sort of "bodyguard chain", with one
angel protecting the principal, the second one protecting the first, and so
on. They'd want spread out a bit in this case, to cover more of the battlefield
in difficult terrain.

The Monster Vault version is almost identical aside from the fixed math. The
damage from its attack is also entirely radiant now.

The sample encounter is level 14 and has two Angels of Protection, an Eidolon
and 3 dragonborn raiders. Clearly these people are serving Tiamat.


## Angel of Valor

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/mm-4e-angel-of-valor.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


The rank and file of ~~Throne~~ the Astral Sea. Individually they're the weakest
of all the angels, but there are "vast armies" of them. When a powerful cleric
needs numbers to get the job done, they summon a bunch of these. One might also
be sent to reward the follower of a god for meritorious deeds, either by
delivering a magic item or with 10 days of service. Angels of valor are made of
fire!

We get several stat blocks for them. The first one is for a Level 8
Soldier, who is likely to be the first angelic opposition the party finds in the
campaign. It has 88 HP, and Resist 10 Fire in addition to the usual radiant
resistance. They have a flight speed of 9.

It dual-wields a longsword and a dagger, and can attack with both on the same
turn. While bloodied, it can light its weapons on fire for a turn, during which
they deal fire damage instead of physical and target Reflex instead of AC. This
makes me think the angel is dipping its blades in its own blood, which is a lot
more Metal than I expected to see in this entry. It can also call lightning from
the heavens on its own position once per encounter, hitting everything on a
Close Burst 1 with mild lightning damage and dazing them for a turn (the angel
itself suffers no damage, of course).

The other stat blocks are Minions of varying levels: 11, 16 and 21, wielding
greatswords. Nothing too terribly exciting about them on their own, but it does
tell me that angels of valor have a role to play all through an angel-heavy
campaign. The Monster Vault has only 16 Minion Soldier version, which I think is
a bit of a loss.

There are two suggested encounters here. The first is level 8, with two regular
angels of valor in the company of a doppelganger assassin and a pair of
shadar-kai. Servants of the Raven Queen, perhaps?

The other is level 11, with 4 angel minions, two basilisks and a bunch of
snake cultists. Zehir worshippers, clearly.

Another interesting use for them with late Heroic tier groups would be to flip
the script and have a PC's deity reward them with the temporary services of an
Angel of Valor.

## Angel of Vengeance

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/mm-4e-angel-of-vengeance.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


Here's an interesting factoid about paladins and clerics in Fourth Edition: they
no longer lose their powers if they abandon their deity's service. The gods need
a different way to punish these prodigal sons, and that's where Angels of
Vengeance come in. In addition to punishing those who have angered the gods they
serve, they're sometimes sent to test those servants who are in danger of
falling (and to immediately punish them when they do).

Towering creatures of cold fire (they're Large), Angels of Vengeance are Level
19 Elite Brutes. They have 446 HP and Resist 15 Fire, Cold and Radiant. With a
speed of "8, fly 12", you will likely not be able to outrun them. It trades away
the usual Angelic Presence for a Cloak of Vengeance, which in addition to the
attack penalty causes 1d8 fire and 1d8 cold damage to anyone who attacks the
angel. Not a lot at these levels, but it's automatic and can add up over time.

These angels wield paired longswords that do almost as much damage as they
should under the new math, which is remarkable. This damage is a mix of
physical, fire and cold. Being an elite, the angel can make two longsword
attacks per turn.

The most interesting power here is certainly Sign of Vengenace, a minor action
encounter power with a range of "sight". Once the angel has placed the Sign on a
target, it can teleport right next to it as a move action until the end of the
encounter. So the first sign you've angered an Angel of Vengeance is when it
teleports into your back line from atop a mountain several kilometers away. A
mobile striker's worst nightmare.

When the angel is bloodied, it turns into a pillar of cold fire for a turn. The
resulting explosion causes fire and cold damage in a Close Burst 2, and makes
the angel immune to damage while it lasts.

The Monster Vault version is pretty much identical aside from the fixed damage
notation. All of its attack damage is now "cold and fire", and the Cloak of
vengeance causes a flat 10 cold and fire damage instead of 1d8 each. If you

The suggested encounter is level 19 and consistes of _two_ of these bad boys
teleporting into your back line while a squad of Angels of Valor rushes forward
to engage. That's how Vecna tells you how he _really_ feels about your party.

## Final Impressions

Fourth Edition angels are very different from their Third Edition counterparts,
and sparked early skirmishes in the edition wars when they were released as
preview material. Them not being universally Good was a major break from
tradition, and the new "humanoid silhouette" look was not a hit.

While I'm a fan of the new cosmology myself, I confess 4e angels never sounded
very exciting to me until I began this Let's Read. When I first read these
books, "Angels == Good" was still a firmly entrenched notion in my mind due to
the traditional Christian depiction of them, so I was hesitant to use them as
enemies.

My opinion has been completely turned around these days thanks to reading the
marvelous [Kill Six Billion Demons][1] webcomic. Its badass kung fu angels give
me an excellent frame of reference for the ones in the Monster manual,
particularly because they have all sorts of different moral outlooks while still
remaining badass kung fu angels. The Angel of Vengeance here is reminds me very
strongly of them, since it also has that "barely contained nuclear explosion
inside a physical shell" vibe.

So if you want 4e angels to feel less generic, K6BD can be an excellent source
of inspiration. Perhaps the servants of each deity organize themselves in
knightly orders, each following a different code. Membership in such an order
alters the angel's physical shell in specific ways: maybe an angel of Pelor
looks like the luminous silhouettes here, but one serving Bane or Tiamat looks
more like a K6BD Thorn Knight. Then you have those unaligned mercenaries, and I
can easily imagine "Reach Heaven Through Violence" being one of _their_ central
tenets.

[1]: https://killsixbilliondemons.com/
[2]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
