---
layout: post
title: "So I've watched a bit of Critical Role..."
tags:
    - gurps
---

...and I gather it's kind of a big deal. There's quite a few "Actual Play"
streams following the same format, and I've seen a few posts by different people
commenting on how it brought a large influx of new players to the RPG hobby in
general and to D&D in particular.

The tone of these posts has varied. A couple were all about how the show sets
somewhat unrealistic expectations on new players because the cast and game are
so awesome. One, by a genuine scion of the Old School, went the other way and
lamented that the hobby was truly damned if Critical Role is what Kids These
Days consider a good game[^1].

I guess I'm somewhere in the middle? I've been at this long enough to know every
group is going to have its own style, and I've been burned by enough flame wars
to accept that a given style isn't bad because it's different from mine.

For example, I've come to accept that uncut videos of 5-hour game sessions
aren't my preferred medium for following other people's games. Give me a
well-written and well-summarized text report any day of the week! Still, the
videos I did watch did provide me with at least one take-away I can use in my
own games: do the voices!

Sure, the Critical Role group is entirely composed of trained voice actors, but
even if you're not one of them you can still add a little something to every
NPC. Perhaps a simple but distinctive mannerism, or a slight change in
pitch. Tiny changes that anyone can do and which might be enough to make your
characters more memorable. I used to do that a lot more in the past, and now
that I see how effective it can be for people on the receiving end I'm going to
start doing it again.

If you're a player, then you can do the same for your own PC. At the very least
it will help others to know when you're speaking in and out of character.

Watching the videos themselves is kinda fun: you can see that this is a
well-oiled group that has been playing for a while. They obviously enjoy each
other's company and are very much into the game. Watching them in action
sometimes kinda makes me want to join the group, impossible though it might
be. I don't often get to be a player.

I get why people say it feels railroaded, though I don't necessarily agree with
them. You're watching a full game happen but have neither any input on how it
develops, nor any access to the GM's notes. There's no real way to know how much
material[^2] goes unused, nor how much is created between sessions or improvised
on the spot in response to player's decisions.

Of course, my inner grognard can't help but notice that while Matt Mercer is
very skilled, he does have a different style from mine. I can't help but think
there are a few things I would do differently if I was in his position.

The first is that when a PC attacks an enemy he describes everything himself,
from the PC's actions to the monster's reaction. The only exception seems to be
when a PC takes down a boss. Years of playing Exalted have hardwired me to
always let players describe their own actions, thankyouverymuch.

The second is that he interprets every hit in combat as resulting in physical
wounds, which leads to some quite gory descriptions at times. Sometimes I
actually start to pity some of the high-HP monsters they fight. I like systems
such as GURPS or Dragon Heresy because they make a clearer distinction about
what's a wound and what isn't.

There's a third thing, but you didn't pass your Perception check for this
paragraph so you don't see it.

In the end I guess I'll probably resort to things like [this recap site][1] when
I want to keep up with the Critical Role campaign. It's not quite the same
thing, but it does the job of conveying what happened in a session a lot faster.

[^1]: For of course there is only one correct way to play RPGs and it is the
    scion's.

[^2]: "Material" here includes those complicated 3D combat maps.

[1]: http://www.projectderailed.com/critical-role-recap/
