---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels Adventure 2: Conclusion"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/350px-Hell's_Rebels_Logo.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

In the last post I said it was time to finally end Turn of the Torrent, but that
was a little hasty. The last post covered the big dungeon - this one is the
denouement.

Clearing the Lucky Bones hideout completely and reactivating the magical pump
makes the place usable as the official home base of the Silver Ravens,
increasing the maximum power of the rebellion. Over the course of this adventure
the PCs have also likely gained the support of the Torrent Knights, earned a
number of favors from a powerful Navy captain, and caught a notorious serial
killer.

Those last three goals are supposed to help cement the Silver Ravens' reputation
as heroic protectors among the people of Kintargo. Catching the Temple Hill
Slasher is obviously a big PR coup, plus I guess the contact networks of the
remaining Torrent Knights and Captain Sargaeta would be pretty dilligent in
spreading the good word about the PCs, making the people like them more even as
Barzilai's administration likes them less. All of this forces Barzilai to
officially acknowledge the existence of the Silver Ravens, and to be
_diplomatic_ about it.

Thrune hosts an award ceremony at the Kintargo Opera House and issues a very
public invitation to the PCs. During the ceremony he makes a speech praising
their civic-mindedness and hands out valuable gifts.

While The Barzilai has it out of the PCs, he will not try to hurt them here, and
will do his best to appear civil. The gifts are even magic items tailored to be
useful to the PCs! The trick here is that the items are distinctive enough to be
tracked via _locate object_ (D&D) and Seeker (GURPS), which will likely come to
bite the PCs unless they're very crafty. Really, the best thing they can do with
these "rewards" is ditch them far away from the Lucky Bones, but there's a good
chance they won't think about the tracking angle and keep them.

And speaking of crafty, PCs who _don't_ try to pick a fight during the ceremony
gain a XP reward for being discreet. According to the book, stabbing Thrune in
front of a crow of thousands might be satisfying, but is unlikely to be
productive at this point in time.

The book also says that Barzilai has completed one of the rituals necessary for
becoming a genius loci not long before the public ceremony, and so is looking a
bit haggard and pale. He'll be back in top form in time for the fight against
the PCs, of course.

After the ceremony, you should give the group access to the full map of the
Lucky Bones basement, secret passages and all, and let them have fun turning it
into a deathtrap dungeon using the resources of the Silver Ravens. The defenses
they install here will be very relevant if/when Thrune discovers its location
and orders his goons to mount an attack.

## Going Off the Rails

The book seems to treat the award ceremony as sort of a closing cutscene in this
adventure, but if you think about it a bit more there are a few things that can
make it go off the rails. Here I'll discuss these things and how to adapt if
they happen.

### Thing 1: Silver Who?

It could be that your PCs were so good at covering their tracks that they
performed all the deeds the books consider flashy and public in a very discreet
manner. Maybe they let someone else take the credit for catching the Slasher and
otherwise did their utmost to prevent their Notoriety from rising. On the one
hand, Thrune would know almost nothing about them. On the other, he'd have no
reason to host the ceremony, preventing the "tense encounter".

I imagine it's actualy better for the PCs in the long run if it doesn't happen,
as the Silver Ravens should gather at least _some_ fame and notoriety for their
deeds. The people of Kintargo can't support you if they don't know who you are!
Still, if your PCs are this committed to being stealthy ninjas, the ceremony
would either not happen at all, or it would have whoever the PCs pinned their
successes on as the guest of honor. This would also change a few other things
down the line.

### Thing 2: We're Not Going to the Fucking Opera House.

The PCs could simply not show up to the ceremony! Even here they could do this
in one of several ways, from simply ghosting Barzilai to issuing this section's
title as a public statement.

However they handle it, this is sure to have a polarizing effect on Kintargo's
citizens. People who already liked them will love this, people who already liked
Thrune will hate it, and some of those who were on the fence will fall to
whatever side they were closest to. Mechanically, this is an increase both in
the rebellion's number of supporters and its Notoriety score, modified by the
specific response the PCs chose to give and by their actions in this adventure.

Interestingly enough, this _shouldn't_ have much of an impact in the future
direction of the campaign. The biggest one is that PCs who didn't attend the
ceremony are sure to not be carrying Barizilai's trap items when that becomes
relevant.

### Thing 3: Hi there! Prepare to Die!

What if your PCs _do_ stab Barzilai in front of a crow of thousands? The book
tries to discourage this by describing Barzilai's entourage, which includes a
dozen beefy hellknights, Kintargo's High Priest of Asmodeus, and two very large
three-headed hellhounds. This might work as a deterrent on Pathfinder, since it
sends the message that "this encounter would be much higher level than your
party", but it might not be enough to dissuade a party of foolhardy Dungeon
Fantasy delvers from having a go. It would likely still not be an easy battle,
but hey, Barzilai is less than three feet away, he's weakened from his sinister
ritual, and if he dies anything but a natural death his master plan is foiled!
Fast-Draw, behead, profit!

Should the PCs succeed in killing Barzilai Thrune here, they haven't exactly
"won" Hell's Rebels yet. They still have a rebellion to conduct and that just
got a lot harder. Kintargo will be thrown into open conflict much earlier than
the books predict, as Thrune's cronies will have the perfect excuse to go fully
genocidal on the citizenry and the central Cheliax government will feel
pressured to send an army to respond to this event even though they didn't like
Barzilai all that much. All of the things that needed to happen for the overall
revolution to be successful now need to happen _a lot faster_, and likely
without the help of those friendly factions that conditioned their support on
the PCs not being violent hotheads.

In other words, the overall challenge level of the campaign will swiftly rise to
match the level of power and audacity of a party that manages to kill Barzilai
in the ceremony and get away with it. If the players aren't confident that they
_have_ that level of badassitude, then the PC that goes up to shake Barzilai's
hand had better not be Impulsive and/or Bloodthirsty.


[1]: {{ "/projects/hells-rebels/" | relative_url }}
