---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Boneclaw"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Here's another monster I never heard of, though I'm almost sure they come from a
previous edition. They're on the Monster Manual only.

Like Bodaks, Boneclaws are constructed undead that don't occur naturally. Lots
of necromantically inclined villains (liches, Orcus priests and the like) use
them as guards and assassins. Creating one involves building a body from corpse
parts and binding an evil soul into it through magic. The result is a Large
Shadow Animate (undead), with variable-length talons that can reach 10 feet in
length at maximum extension.

The ritual for creating a boneclaw is one of those "secrets" that keeps being
stolen and traded away all the time. Some people say it was first developed by
Vecna himself, though the true authors are a coven of hags led by the night hag
Grigwartha. Her version of it used the corpse of an ogre and the soul of an oni,
but others have adapted it for different "raw materials". Grigwartha frequently
traded the ritual for favors from other necromancers, so if you want your
current villain to have access to boneclaws you don't need any special
explanation for it.

This entry has only a single variety, appropriately named **Boneclaw**. It's a
Level 14 Soldier with 136 HP and the usual undead traits of immunity to disease
and poison plus Resist 20 necrotic and Vulnerable 5 Radiant. It's far from
mindless, with Int 10 and an Evil disposition. It speaks Common, and runs at you
with Speed 8.

The boneclaw attacks with its claws (duh), which have Reach 3 and Threatening
Reach. If a boneclaw hits someone with an opportunity attack, it can make
another opportunity attack against the same target in the same turn. A nasty
surprise to people who think they're safe after the first one.

When bloodied, it lets out a Necrotic Pulse in a Close Burst 10, healing undead
allies by 10 points and damaging living enemies by the same amount.

A relatively simple yet flavorful monster, whose flavor is further enhanced by
whomever you partner it with. The sample encounter is level 14, a lich and its
complement of bodyguards: two boneclaws and a shield guardian.

If you want to build a custom boneclaw, an assassin version that's a Lurker or
Skirmisher instead of a Soldier might be appropriate. Other than the undead
resistances, the signature trait here seems to be the long Reach on the claws
and doing something necrotic when it's bloodied.
