---
layout: post
title: "GURPS Illuminati University"
tags:
    - gurps
---

I originally wrote this as a comment on _It Came From the Bookshelf_, but it
looks like Blogger's comment system simply ate it. So I'm expanding it as a
response post instead.

As I mentioned earlier, _It Came from the Bookshelf_ is a blog by John Frazer,
who is using it to review every single book in his extensive RPG
collection. This includes a few GURPS books, and not too long ago he finished
making very insightful comments about pretty much the entire Transhuman Space
line.

And a few days ago he made a post about [GURPS Illuminati University][1]! His
review is quite negative and I'd even say scathing. While I can see where he's
coming from, I don't think I'd go quite that far.

You know those times when a player tries to tell a story to their friends about
this absolutely hilarious thing that happened in the player's campaign? And that
hilarious story ends up getting some polite chuckles at most, because it was
only funny if you were there when it happened.

I'm sure lots of us have been on both ends of this situation multiple times, and
know how it feels. And well, GURPS IOU is that hilarious story in book form.

If I remember its introduction correctly, there was this private BBS maintained
by some people at SJG and their friends, and they used to run a silly campaign
full of in-jokes and silly references to the Illuminati books and to lots of
other media they liked. And then they turned that campaign into a book and
published it. And that's GURPS IOU: the story that's only funny if you were
there, in book form.

I can totally see how someone would loathe this silly, in-jokey setting if they
were going into it right after reviewing every Transhuman Space book. I can
totally see how someone can read it and simply not find it funny, too.

It's probably not something Steve Jackson Games would have published today, but
the mid-90's were the golden age of cheaply-bound GURPS Third Edition books on
exceedingly specific settings and topics. There were hundreds of the things!
What's one more? And their home game gets to be immortalized with an ISBN and
everything! Plus it has illustrations by their artist player! Who happens to be
Phil Foglio...

That "reference barrage" school of nerdy humor also seems to have been in vogue
back then, which helps. Teenagers from Outer Space was out around the same time,
for example, and was widely regarded as the state of the art in anime RPGs. It
was basically a bundle of very specific anime references wrapped around a tiny
handful of rules.

I read GURPS IOU very early in my "nerd career", when I was really into that
sort of humor. I was just learning about this whole world of stuff and it felt
really awesome to get all the references ("Dr. What! I know what that is!"). And
when I finally moved to another city for college and actually met enough people
who also knew about those things, it felt awesome to tell these jokes to them
and have them understand the references too. I didn't get all of the jokes, but
I got enough to spark those feelings above, and to add some of my own equally
horrible ones to the lot when I GMed.

Call it weirdness, call it bad taste, but I got at least a couple of sessions of
hilarious enjoyment out of this book. It holds a special nostalgic place in my
heart for that. Even though it's only funny if you were there.

[1]: http://www.itcamefromthebookshelf.com/2019/11/gurps-illuminati-university.html
