---
layout: post
title: "Skyrim Metalurgy Makes No Sense"
image: /assets/shout.jpeg
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - skyrim
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/shout.jpeg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href="https://www.primagames.com/games/elder-scrolls-v-skyrim/video/top-five-shouts-video">
      (image source)
    </a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

It's true! I mean, it's common for fantasy settings to have items made of one or
more fantastic materials in them, but Tamriel (the setting of Skyrim and other
Elder Scrolls games) goes the extra mile by naming its selection after
completely different real-world materials. So you get things like high-end armor
made from "refined malachite", which in our world is also known as "copper".

GURPS takes a more realistic approach, so when adapting this stuff to GURPS you
need to modify it a little. Here are some Tamrielic cultures written in a format
similar to the one shown in **GURPS Dungeon Fantasy Treasures 1: Glittering
Prizes**, and slightly modified to fit better with GURPS DF. Page references
are given for published game effects, and full stats are given to new ones.

I'm mostly basing myself on Skyrim here, since that's what I played the
most. Any differences between the material below and official lore can be either
born of my ignorance of the overall setting or a change I made on purpose to fit
what I find interesting.

## The Nords of Skyrim

These are pretty much your standard off-brand Vikings. Nords were some of the
first humans to arrive on the continent of Tamriel, sailing into frosty Skyrim
from even frostier Altmora thousands of years ago. They typically value martial
prowess and distrust magic, though there are also plenty of peaceful or
mystically-inclined Nords.

Present-day Nord artisans usually disdain fancy or "impossible" materials,
placing greater value on the skill that goes into making an object. Clothing is
sturdy, warm, and predominantly made of wool and cotton. Fancier attire tends to
be quilted, vividly dyed and/or trimmed with fur. Jewelry consists of rings,
chains or amulets made from precious metals and often jeweled. Cold-weather gear
made mostly from furs is also a common sight.

Weapons and armor are mostly made from plain old steel. Nords like one-handed
swords and axes, usually wielded with round medium shields. Spears (1- or
2-handed) are also popular, with regular and long bows being the premier ranged
weapons. Armor tends to be mail, scale or plate, and is often fur-lined for
extra protection against the cold. This gear is commonly decorated with carved
reliefs of spiral patterns, or with motifs depicting wolves, bears and
eagles. Nords love horned helmets, though they prefer the look of curled ram
horns rather than the straight ones usually depicted in more cliche Viking
imagery.

_Ancient_ Nords were similar, though they were bigger fans of magic. Many
ancient weapons that survive to this day are enchanted or feature "impossible"
embellishments like solid quicksilver inlays. Some ancient Nord smiths even made
weapons and armor entirely from that material. Ancient Nord decoration often
features a dragon motif in addition to the others present in modern day items.

### Game Statistics

**Fur-Lined**: Fur-lined armor acts as winter clothing, removing HT penalties to
resist FP loss from cold. Even if the GM isn't using detailed rules for that,
they can still declare that such protection is required to enter particularly
inhospitable places (like the Ice Caverns of the Frost Wyrm). +1 CF.

Most Nord gear has no inherent CF or reaction modifier, particularly in a
campaign set in Skyrim or whatever your world's own Nord-land is. Fine-quality
and Ornate +1 gear is relatively common, though.

## High Elves

The High Elves of Tamriel, also known as the Altmer, enthusiastically live up to
every "snobby elf" stereotype. As a culture, they see themselves as direct
descendants of the gods, trapped in mortal flesh when the world was
created. This often manifests of a disdain for the other, more "worldly"
peoples, and as a distressing tendency to form ruthless elven supremacist
organizations.

Unlike the Nords, High Elves go all in on using fancy or impossible materials
for everyday items. Clothing tends towards regal robes of elaborately woven and
dyed silk with gold thread embroidery, featuring wing, bird, and solar
motifs. Gold jewelry is prized, particularly rings, earrings and hair
ornaments. "Fake it till you make it" is the order of the day among high elves
that can't afford the genuine article.

Elven armorers eschew ferrous metals in favor of bronze, and will prefer to use
more "magical" substances like refined moonstone or tempered glass if they can
get their hands on them. Their preferred weaponry runs to fencing weapons and
fancy polearms, as well as composite bows. For armor they like shiny mail and
light plate suits. Wings and solar disks or rays are also common decorative
motifs for elven armor and weapons, either carved in relief or inlaid in gold or
solid quicksilver. Gilding is also quite popular.

Note that the leven of ornamentation of a piece of elven gear doesn't have
anything to do with its quality - it's quite common for very ornate pieces to be
of otherwise standard quality.

### Game Statistics

Altmer bows and mail armor always carry the **Elven** modifier. Elven "mail"
here is actually light plate armor. It has the same DR and weight, and can have
modifiers that apply to plate armor.

**Bronze**: In Dungeon Fantasy bronze weapons and armor have exactly the same
stats and price as their steel equivalents. They're just, well,
bronze-colored.

**Refined Moonstone**: Magically reinforced aluminum! This is an "implausible
material" like those found on DF 8 or DF Treasures 1. It's conductive but not
flammable. Items made of refined moonstone have a silvery, pearlescent color. +4
CF.

**Tempered Glass**: This is described in DF 8 for weapons. Plate or scale armor
can also be made of tempered glass. Such armor has +6 CF, is neither flammable
nor conductive, and makes you look like you're wearing a Tiffany lamp.

High Elven gear has no inherent CF modifier, though it's usually expensive
because of all the ornamentation it carries. In places and times where those
elven supremacist organizations are around, wearing Altmer gear gets you a -2
reaction penalty from pretty much everyone. Unless you happen to be a High Elf
yourself, in which case other High Elves (only) will not react at a penalty.

## Dark Elves

The Dark Elves of Tamriel, also known as Dunmer, hail from the distant
ash-choked plains of Morrowind, a place with little metal but plenty of
monstrous giant bugs. As such, many of their durable goods tend to be made out
of chitin and bone rather than metal or stone.

Dunmer clothing is made out of tough fabric, dyed in drab or dark tones. Fancier
outfits are more colorful and have arabesque patterns made using embroidery or
block printing, and might include elaborate hats. Weapons and armor are made out
of expertly molded chitin or bone more often than they're made of metal, and
it's pretty much inevitable that they'll be "decorated" do look like bugs or
skeletons due to that.

### Game Statistics

**Chitin**: Chitin armor tends to be smooth and slightly shiny, and is usually
brown or black in color. There's a bewildering variety of giant bugs in
Morrowind, so any leather, scale or plate armor can be made from chitin. +1 CF.

**Bone**: Described in DF 8 and DF Treasures 1.

Items of Dunmer make have no inherent CF modifiers. People unfamiliar with
chitin and bone armor might react to the wearer at -1 or worse.

## The Dwarves

There are no Dwarves in Tamriel. For some reason the whole civilization just up
and vanished centuries ago, leaving behind a whole lot of ruins filled with
automaton guardians and other still-functioning machinery.

There isn't any dwarf clothing left to describe - as far as the surviving
accounts go, no one saw them wear anything but heavy armor. Dwarven weapons and
armor, as well as most of their durable goods, are made of an advanced metal
alloy no one else knows how to produce. It can be molded in a standard forge
just fine, though. This makes raiding dwarven ruins for their metal fittings a
profitable, if risky, endeavor. All of these items are often decorated with
engraved geometric patterns made out of straight lines. Ancient dwarven helmets
look like sculpted faces - in fact, people in full dwarven plate don't look much
different than one of their constructs.

Dwarves seem to have favored one-handed maces and axes, used with heavy metal
shields. For ranged combat, they used crossbows of varying complexity.

### Game Statistics

Dwarven weapons and armor always have the Dwarven modifier where
applicable. Genuine Dwarven antiques can be sold at an extra +3 CF to
collectors.

## The Orcs

Elder Scrolls Orcs are not considered monsters, and have been a part of
civilized society for a long time. Still, they love fighting even more than
Nords do, and a significant percentage of them are devout worshippers of the God
of Having a Chip on Your Shoulder.

Traditional orc clothing is made from light and breathable fabrics, dyed in
bright colors and some times adorned with quilting or embroidery. Brimless
cylindrical hats are commonly worn by men. "Hardcore" orcs go live in isolated
enclaves where they embrace the "Barbarian Hero" aesthetic of crude hide and
canvas tunics and loincloths. Both types of orc take immense pride in their
ability to craft weapons and armor, though.

Orcs favor nasty serrated blades as weapons, and elaborate suits of plate for
armor - preferrably spiked. The more ornate versions have extensive and
elaborate arabesque reliefs. Orc armorers never use exotic materials solely for
decoration, but they have great love for meteoric iron and orichalcum due to
their useful properties. Orcs take their smithing quite seriously, and orc-made
gear has a higher than usual chance of being Fine-quality or better.

### Game Statistics

Orc gear has no inherent CF modifier or reaction bonus.

Serrated weapons are presented in DF Treasures 1, and spiked armor is in DF 1 or
Adventurers.
