---
layout: post
title: "I Learned Something About Fighter Planes"
tags:
    - gurps
    - fighter-jets
---

I've been playing a lot of Ace Combat 5 and 7 lately, so I have fighter jets in
the brain. And today I learned something I'd never have thought was possible
from looking at the way those games or RPGs like GURPS model them.

Apparently, modern fighter planes are so fast they can shoot _themselves_ down
by outrunning their own cannon fire! Implausible, you say? Well, if you read
[this bit of news][1] you'll see that it actually happened in January of this
year with an F-16, and that there are records of at least one other incident
from back in 1956 with a Grumman F-11.

The gist of it is that shells are fired from the aircraft's cannon at a speed
equal to that of the aircraft plus their muzzle velocity, as you'd
expect. However, they're quickly slowed down by drag, so it's possible for a
plane flying at high speeds to accelerate past the bullets it just fired and
maneuver itself into a position to be hit by them.

GURPS and most RPGs just tend to treat projectiles as having infinite speed. A
character shoots, and the bullet flies out to its maximum range before the end
of that character's turn. This is a pretty decent approximation for the type of
combat that usually happens in these games, which is between people on foot and
at relatively short ranges. **GURPS Tactical Shooting** does have some
additional rules for projectile flight time, but those are optional and mostly
meant for snipers[^1]. None of the existing rule sets contemplates the speed and
ranges involved in jet age air combat.

Do we need specific rules for this hazard? I would say not. It's even more of a
niche situation than long-range sniping, and the bookkeeping required to track
it would not be all that fun even in a realistic game about air combat. No, what
we have here is an _excellent_ result to use if someone rolls a critical failure
on a Gunnery or Pilot test. Even if you go on to become the Ace of Aces, your
squadron-mates will forever embarass you with stories of that one time you shot
yourself down.

[^1]: Who are famous for _not_ moving at supersonic speeds.

[1]: https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2019/04/dutch-f-16-takes-cannon-fire-from-itself/#p3
