---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Colossus"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-colossus.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! You can find all of them [here][1].

One of the most famous D&D "monster ladders" is the one composed of golems:
humanoid constructs built to do the bidding of powerful spellcasters. They're
generally inspired by mythology, with the name for the category being taken from
the legend of the Golem of Prague.

Due to the vagaries of alphabetical ordering, the first "golem" our reading of
the Monster Manual hits is the one standing on the very top rung of that ladder:
the Colossus.

Obviously inspired by the Colossus of Rhodes, who was said to animate when its
city was threatened by invasion, colossi are enormous animated statues, often
made in the image of a god or another mighty entity. Like their smaller
relatives, they exist to obey their creators. Of course, not just anyone can
create one of these babies - it requires an epic ritual most commonly known to
entities such as demon lords and divine exarchs.

The name of the single stat block given to us by the Monster Manual hammers the
point home: it presents us with the **Godforged Colossus**. There are no colossi
on the Monster Vault.

The Godforged Colossus is a Huge Immortal Animate (construct). That's smaller
than I thought it would be, but then again so was the Colossus of
Rhodes. Constructs are not affected by effects that specifically target living
creatures. They also don't sleep, breathe or eat, and are immune to disease and
poison.

This specific construct is a Level 29 Elite Brute with 662 HP. In addition to
the standard construct immunities listed on its stat block, it's also immune to
fear and has Resist 30 to both psychic and force damage. It strides across the
land at speed 10. As a golem-adjacent creature, it's Unaligned, doesn't speak,
and has Int 4.

As its basic attack the Godforged Colossus wields a weapon made of pure
force. It does an amount of force damage that's surprisingly close to that it
should be even without the math fix. A hit also triggers a relatively inaccurate
secondary attack against Will, doing another bit of psychic damage and stunning
the target for a turn on a hit. I feel this is a bit of unecessary complication;
to fix it, add the damage of the secondary attack into that of the primary and
make the whole lot "force and psychic". I don't think anyone who isn't another
colossus resists those two simultaneously. You could leave the secondary attack
for the stun effect, or replace it with the push from the Defensive Strike
(below).

The monster's other standard actions are as follows: it can attack at a range of
20 with a Force Missile, which targets Reflex, does force damage, and pushes 5
squares on a hit. Once per encounter it can unleash the Voice of the Demiurge,
which targets the Will of all enemies within a Close Burst 10 (!), doing
respectable psychic damage and stunning for a turn on a hit.

Finally, as a reaction whenever someone moves adjacent to it, it can use a
Defensive Strike that recharges on 5-6. On a hit it does all the damage of the
basic attack (some force, some psychic) and allows a secondary attack against
Fortitude that on a hit pushes the target 5 squares, knocks them prone, and
dazes (save ends).

No specific mention is made of the material used to build this colossus, though
judging by the resistances I'd say it's actually made of pure force tinted with
the thoughts of the god who built it.

## Encounters

The book says a colossus might be a city's greatest guardian, the idol of a god
that animates to punish defilers, or a pair of great sculptures acting as
guardians of another creature's lair.

The first one is our old buddy Rhodes; the second brings to mind that demon
statue from the cover of the 1e PHB; and the third is surely the sphinxes from
the Neverending Story. The last boss from Shadow of the Colossus (the Tower)
also fits here.

The first example encounter is level 28, a godforged colossus and 4 dragonborn
champions. Tiamat or Bahamut... or maybe both, with equal teams fighting each
other! Does the level 23 party dare to interfere?

The second is level 29, 1 colossus, 3 sorrowsworn reapers, and 2 shadowraven
swarms. Woe be unto those who trespass upon the fane of the Raven Queen.

## Final Impressions

I'm a fan of colossi, particularly of those whose shadow you can stand
under. They make me wish D&D in general had more giant-climbing rules.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
