---
layout: post
title: "Where I Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Aboleth"
image: /assets/mm4e-aboleth.png
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/mm4e-aboleth.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Our first monster is the Aboleth, everyone's favorite fishy
masterminds. Background information on them here is a bit sparse if compared to
previous editions, though this was remedied later in 4e's lifetime. They're only
on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

The book says Aboleths are hulking amphibious creatures that originally hail
from the Far Realm, but now live in the Underdark, swimming its lightless depths
and creeping through its tunnels while leaving a slimy trail. Sometimes they
make their lairs closer to the surface, though. Aboleths are telepathic and may
live together as broods, attended by willing Kuo-Toa servants or by slimy
servitors created through a ritual from humanoid victims.

Peeking at the stats we can see all aboleths are Evil and highly intelligent
(Int 23), so they retain their story roles as fishy masterminds. The two new
things here, as far as I know, are making them amphibious and explicitly linking
them to the Far Realm. The amphibious thing is really welcome in actual play,
since it gives the GM lots more options for evil plans they can enact, and for
how the PCs can confront them.

The Far Realm thing is interesting because it provides us with a link between
aboleths and the other pseudo-Lovecraftian monsters in this edition. Basically,
anyone with the aberrant origin in 4e has some tie to the Far Realm.

Future books for 4e would elaborate on the Aboleths a bit more - they're
actually survivors from a previous universe, escaping its destruction by hiding
in the Far Realm and then migrating to the current world after it was
created. I like that a lot! If you combine that with the "ancestral memory"
thing they had in previous editions, this means they have access to staggeringly
ancient and eldritch secrets. "Why yes, I just sold a copy
of Summon Azatoth to this dapper gentleman that came in here just before
you. Why am I packing my bags? No reason, really."


## The Numbers

We get three aboleth stat blocks here. While they're pretty different from each
other, they all share a few signature traits.

First, all of them have a swim speed of 10 and a land speed of 5. That means
they're as fast on land as a dwarf or an armored man! They attacks work just as
well in and out of the water, of course.

Second, they all have an ability called Mucus Haze, an Aura 5 which makes
enemies treat the affected area as difficult terrain. Aboleths aren't just
slimy, their slime is this almost sentient thing that pollutes the air and
clings to any who dare oppose them, slowing them down.

And third, their basic melee attacks (tentacles!) all cause increased damage
against Dazed targets. We'll see how each aboleth variant exploits this.

Our first monster in this entry is the Aboleth Lasher, a level 17
Brute. Defensively it has 200hp and average AC for its level and role (29), but
his other defenses are lower than I would expect (27/25/25). Its tentacle attack
does Brute-level damage and Dazes, and it gets to make two against targets that
grant it combat advantage. A simple and direct creature with a simple and direct
strategy: charge someone and keep tentacling them until they die. Bonus points
if that someone is the wizard or another equivalent squishy. "Simple and direct"
doesn't mean "dumb", though. The Lasher has Int 23, so even he is qualified to
be a sinister mastermind and to fight smart. And as a Regular monster, he won't
be alone.

The Aboleth Slime Mage is the Level 17 Artillery variant. It has better defenses
(AC 31, others 28/28/29), but only 128 HP to its name. This one is going to open
up with a Slime Burst that selectively targets enemies in an Area Burst 4, which
pretty much means "all the PCs". It does okay damage and immobilizes with a Slow
after-effect. Then it's going to use an at-will Dominate on the PC with the
lowest Will defense, and proceed to chuck Slime Orbs (that damage and Slow) at
the squishies (or anyone who managed to dodge the opening salvo). It can only
dominate one PC at once, but there's a good chance _someone_ will be dominated
at any one time. Anyone who attempts to engage the slime mage in melee has to
get through the Mucus Haze while slowed, so good luck with that. If they do
manage it, they will only have to contend with the mage's lackluster tentacles,
and will be able to make opportunity attacks if it tries to use any of its other
powers.

Finally we have the Aboleth Overseer, a Level 18 Elite Controller (Leader). Its
defenses are the expected for its level, with Reflex being a little weaker. Its
Psychic Slime attack will likely catch the whole party in its area of effect and
Daze everyone it hits so the Lasher (above) can start doing increased damage
from the start. Fortunately, it can be used at most twice per fight. It has the
same Dominate attack as the Slime Mage, but it can follow that up with Enslave,
dealing obscene psychic damage to a dominated creature and making the domination
permanent if it reduces the victim to 0 HP. It can also make itself and one ally
temporarily invisible once per encounter, so it pairs well with a lurker. Its
tentacle attack does okay damage and Dazes as well.

Now, Enslave is a bit confusing. Does the victim get some HP back when its
enslaved, or do they just drop as normal? I'm inclined to go with the first
option, giving them a healing surge's worth so they can keep being a nuisance in
the fight. In any case, the "permanent" domination ends if the rest of the party
manages to kill the Overseer. Should the Overseer manage to escape along with
the enslaved victim, it can use a special ritual convert them into an Aboleth
Servitor, which is actually for-reals permanent.

Aboleth Servitors are humanoids whose skin has been turned into transparent
slime. They have a swim speed and breathe underwater, but suffer greatly if they
get too far away from their aboleth master. The average servitor is a Level 16
Minion, but I imagine the GM could custom-build a "named" Regular or Elite
minion for those times when the aboleths manage to make off with an enslaved
PC. You can also make any other appropriate monster into a servitor by giving it
a swim speed and the Aboleth Devotion trait from the minion (and possibly
increasing its level to somewhere around 16 if it's lower).

Suggested encounters are a level 17 composed of 1 Slime Mage and 2 Lashers
alongside a troop of Kuo-Toa minion guards, or a level 18 composed of 1 overseer
with 8 minion servitors plus a Nabassu Gargoyle and a Savage Minotaur, which I
guess would be those custom-built servitors I conjectured about.

These are "Final Battle" material for a level 13 or 14 party, or the sort of
patrol a level 17-19 party might expect when raiding the fortress of a large
aboleth brood.

## Final Impressions

I never gave aboleths much thought before, but these are quite nifty! I think it
helps a lot that they can go on land now. Your players might not find then as
nifty as I do, though, since they're quite liberal with distributing the Dazed
condition. 4e players _hate_ Dazed and Stunned, since they sharply limit their
actions during combat and can be actually harder to get rid of than being at 0hp
or less. Domination is a bit worse, because you're both Dazed _and_ playing for
the other team.

Aside from being highly intelligent, all the aboleths presented here are trained
in Arcana, Dungeoneering and Insight, so you can still have a scenario where the
party needs to negotiate for an aboleth's services as a sage. Dungeoneering in
4e also includes knowledge about aberrant creatures, so it's also a good proxy
for knowledge about the Far Realm.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
