---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Earth Giants"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-earth-giants.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Definitely not a D&D illustration
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

The "Earth Giants" designation is new to 4th edition, but the monsters that make
up most of them are not. In other words, this is going to be a post about Hill
Giants. They've been in D&D since the start and are present in both books in
this edition.

## The Lore

Like all of the other giant categories, the "Earth Giant" designation covers the
Titans aligned with the element of Earth and the giant servitors they
created. While both are technically among the weakest of their kind, they can
still pose an existential threat to most kingdoms of Medium-or-smaller humanoids
if they manage to organize, and even a small group is a serious threat.

The Titans are very obviously creatures of Earth, resembling humanoid
mountains made out of earth and rock. While they created several types of giant,
the most common variety is known as the Hill Giant from its preferred
environment.

Hill Giants are so much more aligned to the world than to the Elemental Chaos
that they resemble big people. Big, dumb, violent people. I believe hill giants
are inspired by the giants you see in some fairy tales, of the kind that walks
in from somewhere and begins eating people's goats until some clever tailor
comes in and kills them through trickery.

While D&D hill giants aren't much smarter than the ones in the fairy tales,
they're quite a bit harder to defeat, particularly because they're only alone if
you're lucky. Hill giant communities are villages built out of mud and logs, and
may feature a chief that decided to copy the sophisticated ways of their tiny
neighbors, style themselves a king or queen, and begin demanding tribute.

Hill giants fight with Stone Age weapons, which are still quite deadly due to
their size and the strenght of their wielders. They also have excellent throwing
arms and are able to hurl boulders with more accuracy than a catapult. They are
Chaotic Evil on account of being on Team Primordial, but if it's possible for a
Friendly Giant who is Unaligned or Good to exist at all, they're probably from
this branch of the family.

## The Numbers

Hill Giants are Large Natural Humanoids with the Earth and Giant keywords. They
have a typical Int score of 7, making them stupid but still capable of tactics
and coordination. Earth Titans are Huge Elemental Humanoids with the same
keywords and a typical Int of 10.

### Hill Giant (Both)

The classic model is a Level 13 Brute with 159 HP. Its long legs give it a land
Speed of 8. The versions from both books are identical, with the only difference
being that the MV one has updated damage totals.

Hill giants attack with a club, which might be something like a tree trunk. Once
per encounter they can make a Sweeping Club attack, which allows them to attack
two targets, push then 2 squares, and knock them prone in addition to doing club
damage.

They can also hurl rocks out to Range 10, which does a bit less damage than the
club but is still respectable. Ammunition comes from the landscape, and if no
handy boulders are available the giant still carries around 5 of them in its
satchel.

### Hill Giant Hunter (MV)

This giant is Level 13 Artillery with 109 HP. A bit more sophisticated than its
basic cousin, it fights with javelins that it uses in melee or as ranged weapons
(Range 20). I imagine these are sculpted from smaller trees, though the wooden
palisade of your typical human village would also provide plenty of ammunition
in a pinch.

The hunter is still a hill giant, so it also throws rocks out to Range 20 for
about double the damage of a javelin, an attack that recharges on a 5-6. Its
loadout is about 6 javelins and 4 rocks, though as mentioned before the
surrounding landscape can provide additional ammo if needed.

### Hill Giant Earth Shaman (MV)

This earthbending spellcaster is a Level 13 Controller (Leader) with 131
HP. All if its attacks are some form of magic.

Its basic melee attack is the Earthgrip Slam (Melee 2 vs. AC), which does damage
and restrains for a turn on a hit. Once per encounter it can cast Earthen Chains
(Ranged 10 vs. Reflex), which does a little bit of damage, stuns (save ends),
and pulls the target to the ground if it was flying. The first time one of the
giant's allies hits the stunned target, it heals 15 HP.

It also has another spell named Earth Wave (recharge 5-6; Close Blast 5
vs. Fortitude; enemies only). On a hit, this does a bit of damage and pushes
targets 2 squares. As an _effect_, it automatically knocks all targets prone,
and allows every ally in the blast to shift up to 3 squares and make a basic
melee attack. Just the thing to use when leading a pack of those hill giant
brutes.

### Earth Titan (Both)

Earth Titans have nearly identical stats in both books, the main difference
being their damage (which has been increased in the MV). They're Level 16 Elite
Brutes with 384 HP.

An earth titan's basic melee attack is a powerful Reach 3 Slam, and it can make
two of those as a standard action. It can also hurl rocks out to Range 20, which
do damage and daze (save ends) on a hit. Once per encounter it can stomp really
hard and use Earth Shock (Close Burst 2 vs. Fortitude), which does damage and
stuns for a turn on a hit, and does half damage with no riders on a miss.

## Sample Encounters

The MM gives us two:

- Level 13: 3 hill giants and 1 displacer beast packlord. The displacer beast is
  the smartest of the bunch!

- Level 17: 1 Earth Titan, 2 Hill Giants, 2 War Trolls, and 4 Ogre Bludgeoneers
  (minions). This looks like what might await the Level 13 party at the end of
  the Steading of the Hill Giant (or Earth Titan) Chief.

## Final Impressions

Hill Giants are suitable opponents for early Paragon heroes, and yet their
attacks are simple enough that you could run several of them without too much
mental effort. Their pair well with galeb duhrs (which they still enslave), or
with other paragon-tier creatures that might inhabit their preferred hills,
mountains and canyons. That does potentially include dragons!

The MV gives us enough stat blocks that we can build a large variety of
encounter groups made up entirely (or mostly) of hill giants, which is perfect
for the GM who wants to adapt the first Against the Giants adventure to 4e.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
