---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Griffon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-griffon.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Another fantasy classic, these lion-eagle hybrids have a different spelling for
their name in every source they appear in. D&D has always gone with "Griffon"
and has featured them in its bestiaries since at least BECMI and AD&D 1st
Edition. In Fourth Edition they appear only in the MM.

## The Lore

A griffon is a large flying carnivore with the head, wings and foreclaws of a
giant eagle, and the hindquarters of some non-flying beast. They're strong
enough to be used as flying mounts, though how easy they are to train depends on
the exact variety you're dealing with.

The most common variety is called simply a Griffon, and has a lion's
backside. They can't be trained at all unless you start with a hatchling, but
stories tell that some elves and eladrin can use magic to control them and ride
them into battle. Griffon eggs fetch a high price on the open market (1000 GP)
from people who want a shot at training them, or who think they have that
eladrin magic figured out.

The ones you're most likely to find as trained mounts are the Hippogriffs, who
have horse backsides and a considerably more tractable temperament. This makes
them the most common flying mount among the sapient people of the world. I'm
pretty sure Nerath had whole regiments of hippogriff cavalry and that the
practice survives in any post-imperial community of sufficient size.

Hippogriffs are brave enough that that they can readily be ridden into battle,
and they actually breed true with normal horses as well as with each other. The
offspring of a horse and a hippogriff will either be another hippogriff or a
temperamental horse. They're expensive enough to be a prime target for thieves,
and there's a thriving black market on young specimens.

Even the Elemental Chaos has its own griffon species in the form of the Rimefire
Griffon, a formidable beast that the book describes as being sapient, unlike its
natural cousins. It's not exactly a genius at Int 4, but it still "allies" with
ice archons or gets "pressed into service" by efreets instead of being "tamed".

## The Numbers

Griffons are Large Natural Beasts with the Mount keyword (the Rimefire Griffon
is Elemental instead). They're a bit slow on land, but are excellent fliers.

### Hippogriff

The typical hippogriff is a Level 5 Skirmisher with 64 HP. It walks at speed 4
and flies at speed 10. Being a MM monster, it has a listed overland flight speed
of 15, fast enough to outrun most dragons.

Its basic attack is a bite, and it can perform a Flyby Attack that works as
expected: the hippogriff flies it speed, attacks at any point in the movement,
and draws no opportunity attacks. It can also perform a Diving Overrun, a charge
which does more damage than the bite, knocks the target prone on a hit, and
lands the hippogriff adjacent to it.

As mounts, these creatures grant +1 to all of their riders' defenses.

### Hippogriff Dreadmount

An armored hippogriff that fights better on the ground. It's a Level 5 Soldier
with 66 HP and the same speed as the standard model.

Dreadmounts trade their usual agility for increased battlefield control. They
fight with bites, and can do Wing Slams (Melee 1 vs. Reflex) against enemies who
try to shift or move away from them. These attacks are interrupts, doing some
damage and knocking enemies prone on a hit. They can't be done while in the air.

Dreadmounts are also as stable as dwarves - they move 1 square less from forced
movement effects, and can roll an immediate save to avoid being knocked prone.

### Griffon

Classic griffons are Level 7 Brutes with 98 HP. They run with speed 6, and fly
with speed 10.

Griffons fight with their claws, and they're all about charging: charge attacks
give them a +4 attack bonus instead of the usual +1. When acting as mounts,
their charges allow them to make two claw attacks in addition to the rider's
attack.

When bloodied, griffons lose their shit: they become immune to fear, gain an
extra move action, a +2 bonus to attacks, and a -2 penalty to defenses.

### Rimefire Griffon

These are Level 20 Skirmishers with 186 HP. Their land speed is 5, and their
flight speed 10. They have Resist 10 to both cold and fire.

Rimefire griffons have lion bits but fight more like hippogriffs, with a basic
bite that does physical and cold damage and the same Flyby Attack power. They
can also breathe fire (Close Blast 5 vs. Reflex), an attack that starts
"uncharged" but recharges after the creature hits twice with a bite attack. When
used as a mount, the rimefire griffon grants its elemental resistances to its
rider.

The lore description for the fiery breath is fun: their bites absorb the
target's body heat, causing the creature's prominent horn to glow red-hot. Once
it stores up enough heat, it can release it as a blast.

### Sample Encounters

The sample encounters emphasize the role of griffons as mounts:

- Level 5: a human mage and 2 human guards riding hippogriffs.

- Level 5: 3 warforged soldiers and their dreadmount-riding captain.

- Level 6: 2 eladrin fey knights on griffons.

- Level 20: 1 Ghaele of Winter riding a rimefire griffon, accompanied by a
  quartet of fire and ice archons.

I like them, particularly the emphasis on them being mounts. I get the feeling
that investing in horses in D&D's implied setting is a fool's game. You have
boar-riding dwarves, griffon-riding elves, human knights on hippogriffs, and I'm
sure there's a ridable drake somewhere. Warhorses are so last edition.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
