---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Magma Beast"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-magma-beast.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Magma beasts are probably the conceptial descendants of the Magmen of AD&D 1st
Edition, which later turned into Magmin during 3.x. There are likely a few other
monsters that ended up in this entry as well. They appear only on the Monster
Manual.

## The Lore

Magma Beasts are elementals of earth and fire, obviously native to the Elemental
Chaos. They seem to be a little more physical than the creatures that were
listed under the Elemental entry, in that they actually have metabolisms and
thus have goals other than to exuberantly rage for all eternity.

These creatures live in the most fiery patches of the Elemental Chaos, the ones
that contain rivers of flowing magma, active volcanoes, or at least large
amounts of ambient geothermal energy. They can be found in the world or the
shallow Underdark in similarly hot places.

They sustain their mineral bodies by eating various ores and clays found in
these environments, but they're also quite capable of digesting lesser elemental
creatures and even organic beings!  Organics do have a lot of calcium and iron
in their composition, after all.

Some magma beasts prefer an organic diet, having acquired a taste for the flavor
or burned meat. That doesn't necessarily make them people-eaters, though I guess
the stupider varieties aren't going to stop and ask their next prospective meal
if it can talk. The lair of a people-eating magma beast will _not_ be littered
with the valuables of its victims - it eats those too.

Sapient magma beasts (magma brutes and magma hurlers) can be reasoned with and
bribed with offers of food, so that's one way you can find them working
alongside others. They're also able to bully their dumber relatives into obeying
them.

## The Numbers

Magma beasts tend to be lower level than the creatures in the Elemental entry,
so they might be a good way to introduce your Heroic Tier PCs to monsters from
the Elemental Chaos.

The "stupid" kinds of magma beast are Elemental Magical Beasts with Int 2, while
the "smarter" kinds are Elemental Humanoids with Int 5. The lore makes me think
the stupid ones should be Beasts, since they seem to behave more like animals.

All magma beasts are immune to petrification, have 10/tier fire resistance, and
are slowed for a turn when they take cold damage. They have the Earth and Fire
keywords.

### Magma Claw

This Medium beast looks like a stinger-less scorpion. It's a Level 4 Brute with
64 HP and training in both Endurance and Stealth. It uses the latter to disguise
itself as a rock outcropping until a potential victim wanders into charge
range. It moves at speed 4, but charges at speed 8.

Its basic attack is a claw that does a mix of physical and fire damage, and it
can also Spew Lava at-will (vs. Reflex). A hit with this does ongoing 5 fire
damage and immobilizes (save ends). I imagine the lava comes out of where the
stinger would be.

### Magma Hurler

This Medium humanoid is Level 4 Artillery with 41 HP. It moves at Speed 4.

Magma hurlers fight in melee with slams, and they can also form and hurl balls
of magma. These have a range of 15, target Reflex, and do fire damage; a miss
causes all creatures adjacent to the target to take a bit of automatic fire
damage. Don't cluster up!

Hurlers are one of the two "smart" magma beasts. If you know Primordial, you
might be able to talk to them.

### Magma Strider

These Large beasts look like those long-legged water strider bugs. They hunt
through the same endurance-based method ancient humans used, pursuing their
intended prey for hours until it becomes exhausted. They're Level 10 Skirmishers
with 105 HP who move and climb at Speed 6, so they can keep up with most
terrestrial creatures.

Their basic attack is a Reach 2 bite that does both immediate and ongoing fire
damage (save ends). They can often **Burn Across the Battlefield** (recharge
3-6), which allows then to immediately charge another target after hitting
someone with a basic bite. Their **Burning Mobility** also causes 5 fire damage
to anyone who hits them with an opportunity attack.

### Magma Brute

This Large humanoid is the other "smart" magma beast. Left alone, they behave as
nomadic scavengers. However, as Level 13 Brutes, they're right at the point
where they begin to bump into "proper" elementals and other more powerful
denizens of the Chaos, so they often end up bullied into servitude.

Magma Brutes have 156 HP, walk at speed 4, and have a fire resistance of 20 as
Paragon-tier creatures. Their single attack is a Reach 2 Slam that does physical
damage plus ongoing fire damage (save ends) and is in dire need of a damage fix.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We have two:

- Level 5: 2 magma claws, 2 magma hurlers, and 2 fire bats. Perfect for an early
  fire dungeon, and likely to make your tieflings and fire sorcerers feel
  powerful.

- Level 13: 3 magma brutes and 1 beholder eye of flame. Oh, so that's who likes
  to bully the brutes.

I'm not terribly enthusiastic about magma beasts. However, I think it's
refreshing to see an entry about what is basically dangerous fantasy wildlife
after so many instances of "kill this thing on sight" courtesy of the Monster
Vault.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
