---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Manticore"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-manticore.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Manticores are based on Persian myth, and have been in D&D at least since the
days of BECMI. Here they are present in both the Monster Manual and the Vault.

## The Lore

Manticores are monsters with the body of a very large lion, bat-like wings, and
a vaguely humanlike face. Their tails are long, whip-like, and tipped with iron
spikes.

These creatures are sapient, but deeply stupid and even more deeply _mean_,
living up to their Chaotic Evil alignment. They claim large hunting territories
around their lairs and are known to extend them even further on a whim. Like,
say, when they discover a tasty village just on the other side of the current
borders. They specifically seek out sapient prey if at all possible. Their
favorites are humans and dwarves.

Tough technically capable of parley, manticores rarely bother listening. Those
who manage to get through to a manticore can sometimes appease them with bribes
of food, a tactic also used by smarter villains who want to hire some manticore
muscle. There's absolutely no guarantee the manticore will show up for the job,
or stay appeased. Even manticores trained since they were cubs have a tendency
to turn on their handlers. Should the beast actually hold its end of the
bargain, it might end up serving as a mount for the villain commanding it.

Manticores have three rows of teeth that work a bit like a shark's, often
falling off and being replaced by new ones. Loose teeth and spikes, often stuck
in mangled corpses, are a sure sign that you're in manticore country. Despite
having all those teeth, they prefer to use their claws in combat.

Heraldry has them as symbols of unpredictable danger, viciousness and
cruelty. Manticore iconography is used in danger signs such as those meant to
keep people away from an unstable abandoned mine or the like. They're also
adopted as symbols by groups such as evil mercenaries or bandits who want to
seem all edgy and badass.

## The Numbers

The Monster Manual only has one manticore stat block, but the Vault has _four_,
each with a different role. That's enough for you to make an all-manticore
encounter. They're Large Natural Magical Beasts.

Manticores run at speed 6 and fly at speed 8. Their keen senses give them
trained Perception, and all of them can shoot those spikes from their
tails. They don't run out of ammunition either. Perhaps the spikes magically
grow as soon as they're fired, or perhaps there are so many to begin with they
have Enough(TM) for any given fight.

### Manticore (MM)

The classic model is a Level 10 Elite Skirmisher with 210 HP and the Mount
keyword.

Its basic attack is a claw, and it can launch spikes out to Range 10. The spike
attack allows them to shift 3 squares either before or after firing. **Manticore
Fury** is a standard action that allows the beast to make both a claw and a
spike attack in any order. Every so often (recharge 3-6) the manticore can whip
its tail really hard and fire a **Spike Volley** (Area Burst 1 within 10).

Its mount ability is **Guided Sniper**, representing the fact that it allows its
rider to act as a spotter. This gives both the basic spike throw and Spike
Volley a +2 bonus to hit.

I'm tempted to plop a cheeky goblin atop a manticore, but realistically the
rider would be someone more badass - otherwise they'd just get eaten instead.

### Manticore Striker (MV)

Essentially a regular version of the MM elite manticore, this one is a Level 10
Skirmisher with 106 HP. None of the MV manticores have the Mount keyword or
abilities.

The striker can shift 2 squares either before or after its **claw** and **tail
spike** attacks, and lacks the ability to make both in the same round. If
someone hits it, though, it can make a **spike counterattack** as a reaction,
shooting a tail spike at the attacker without provoking opportunity attacks.

### Manticoer Impaler (MV)

This Level 11 Brute has 138 HP. Its **claw** and **tail spike** attacks do
Brute-level damage, and it also has a **Tail Lance** (melee 2 vs. AC) that can
grab a target by impaling it.

The escape DC on the grab is 19, and while grabbed the target takes ongoing
physical damage. While it has a creature impaled, the manticore's flight gains
an altitude limit of 6 squares.

While it's grabbing someone, the manticore can also use **Prepare to Drop**, a
move action that allows it to fly its speed and pull the target along. This
includes pulling them straight up! It's not stated in the stat block, but I
think the manticore can choose to release someone it's grabbing on its
turn. Damage from the drop uses standard falling rules (1d10 per 2 squares/10ft,
IIRC).

### Manticore Spike Hurler (MV)

As you might have guessed from the name, this is the Artillery manticore. It's
Level 13 with 100 HP.

It has the usual **claw** and **tail spike** attacks, with the spike being more
accurate and doing more damage. It can also launch a **spike volley** (area
burst 1 within 10) at will.

### Manticore Sky Hunter

This one is a Level 13 Soldier (Leader) with 130 HP, and it's remarkable for
being a manticore that cares about its allies. It has a **Shielding Wings** aura
1 that grants allies inside a +2 bonus to AC and Reflexes.

Its basic attacks are the usual **claw** and **tail spike**, with the claws also
marking for a turn on a hit. As a minor action it can also let out a
**Threatening Roar** that automatically marks everyone in a Close Burst 1 for a
turn.

If any marked enemy within 5 squares makes an attack that doesn't include the
sky hunter, it can use a tail spike attack on them as a reaction (**Defender's
Spike**).

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The MM has two encounters featuring its elite manticore:

- Level 11: 1 manticore, 1 galeb duhr rockcaller, 4 ogre savages.

- Level 13: 2 manticores, 2 hill giants, 4 ogre thugs (minions).

In the first one I think the manticore is serving as the galeb duhr's mount,
having finally come across someone it can't eat. While it's funny to imagine the
hill giants trying to hide the manticores in the second encounter, I don't think
that would work out very well for them.

I like manticores, they're fun to run and fun to fight. The four MV stat blocks
give us a bit more variety in tactics while staying true to the core MM
concept. Perhaps you could take a pair of those and make them into Huge Elites
so that those giants can finally make their dreams of flying come true.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
