---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Death Giants"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-fire-giant.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Definitely not a D&D illustration
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Death Giants are a 3.x creation, first appearing in one of that edition's
Monster Manual 2 or 3. For 4e, they get a new backstory. They appear only on the
Monster Manual.

## The Lore

Back at the dawn of creation when the titans were exploring the world, some of
them found their way to the Shadowfell and liked the place so much they moved
there permanently along with their giant children and allowed the energies of
the place to permeate their beings. And that's how the first death titans and
giants came to be.

These giants have entirely abandoned their elemental nature and their allegiance
to the primordials, and are now fully creatures of the Shadowfell. They're
probably also the world's biggest fans of death metal. Though they stick mostly
to their native plane, they will sometimes live in the world in places like
graveyards and necropoli where the wall between the two planes is thin.

Death giants derive their power and sustenance from the souls of living
creatures. They don't need to consume souls very often, but they still enjoy
hunting for sport and most of them are surrounded by a shroud of trapped,
wailing spirits waiting their turn to be lunch.

They're fairly intelligent, but my impression is they're not too fond of banding
together in large groups. They frequently associate with undead or with
necromantic cults that like performing sacrifices. The latter provide a steady
source of nutrition, since a death giant doesn't need to personally kill someone
to trap their soul - the victim just has to die near the giant.

## The Numbers

Death giants and titans are Large and Huge Shadow Humanoids with the Giant
keyword. They have Darkvision, resistance to necrotic damage, and an Aura 5 that
captures the soul of anyone who dies in range. They can spend these captured
souls to power some of their abilities. Their typical Int score is 12, making
them the smartest giants we've seen so far, and their alignment is Evil.

We get two stat blocks here, one for the giant and one for the titan, but you
can use the guidelines above to make your own.

### Death Giant

This is a Level 22 Brute with 255 HP. It has Resist 15 Necrotic and a speed
of 7. It wears mail and wields a greataxe.

The greataxe is Reach 2 and does physical damage with he High Crit property,
suffering from the damage bug. The giant's most distinctive powers come from its
soul shroud.

Anyone who dies within 5 squares of a death giant adds one soul shard to its
shroud. No detail on whether this "shard" is a whole soul or a literal shard of
one. If it's the latter, then a single death might add shards to multiple giants
if their auras overlap.

In any case, you can assume a death giant starts the fight with 4 shards in its
shroud unless your story demands otherwise. It can consume one shard to heal 20
HP, or spend it to power a Soulfire Burst (Close Burst 1 vs. Reflex) that does
necrotic damage and could _really_ use a damage fix. If the giant's shroud ever
runs out of shards, it takes a -2 penalty to its attacks until it can add more.

Since a being has to _die_ to add a shard to the giant's shroud, I think it's
one of those monsters that has an incentive to finish off downed PCs. It also
pairs really well with minions, and you might also want to add some minion-like
innocent victims in your battlefield that the PCs would have an extra incentive
to protect.

### Death Titan

This is a Level 25 Elite Brute with 574 HP. Its aura works the same as that of
the death giant, and also inflicts a -2 penalty to the attacks of any enemies
within. Its necrotic resistance is 30, and its speed is 8.

Death titans wear plate and fight with Huge greataxes, which are Reach 3 and
have the High Crit property. They can attack twice per action with these axes.

The death titan's soul shroud works the same way as that of the giant, but the
titan doesn't need to wait for people to die around it! It has an ability called
Soul Devourer (Ranged 5 vs. Fortitude), which takes a bite off the soul of an
enemy, causing it to lose a healing surge and adding one soul shard to the
titan's shroud. An excellent power to use from a distance while the titan's
buddies engage in melee.

## Sample Encounter and Final Impressions

The sample encounter in the MM is level 24: 1 death titan, 2 death giants, 1
voidsoul specter and 1 deathpriest hierophant.

IIRC, the deathpriest hierophant is tied to Orcus, the demon lord of undeath
(we'll get to him in time). So perhaps you could say that in your campaign,
death giants were originally created by the primordial who became Orcus, and
that their transformation happened at the same time as that of their master.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
