---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Rust Monster"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-rust-monster.webp" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Rust Monsters are a D&D original, inspired by some cheap plastic "dinosaur"
figures Gygax had lying around and intended to use as miniatures. In 4e they
first appear in the Monster Manual 2 and later in the Monster Vault, so we'll be
peaking ahead a bit.

## The Lore

Rust monsters came about naturally, even though plenty of people swear they were
created by a spiteful god who thought mortals had too much shiny stuff. Everyone
hates these things.

Rust monsters feed on metal, by secreting powerful enzymes which dissolve it and
slurping the slurry. Normally they target ore veins and leech the metal out of
them, but items made of processed metal draw them like blood in the water draws
sharks. Since food is usually scarce, rust monsters tend to have only one or two
young per brood, but when they find a plentiful source of metal like a lode or a
civilized settlement, their broods increase in size to make use of that bounty.

It's not just adventurers who curse these creatures! They get into civilized
settlements and mines and eat away at all the metal tools, fittings, and support
beams if you let them. Some dwarf and duergar settlements develop complex wards
to keep them at bay, but their effectiveness is limited - some rust monsters
have a knack for finding holes in them.

The bright side of all of this is that rust monsters can be a source of
residuum, that precious substance which is used to fuel magic rituals and
enchant items. You see, most of them can't digest magic, so any magic
impregnating the metal they eat ends up stored in their bodies as clumps of
residuum. This is enough incentive for some people to go out hunting rust
monsters, despite the risks to life, limb, and loot.

Some rust monsters _are_ able to digest residuum, which causes them to grow much
larger and to crave magic as much as they do metal. These enhanced monsters are
known as Dweomer Eaters.

### A Note on Residuum.

Residuum gets introduced in the PHB, so I haven't talked about it too much
here. It's basically concentrated, crystalized magic: I imagine it as
rainbow-colored sparkly dust. The rules measure it by its monetary value (for
example, "100gp worth of residuum"), so I imagine it's extremely valuable for
its weight and only found in tiny quantities.

When you disenchant a magic item using a ritual from the PHB, you get a fifth of
its monetary value back as residuum, which ensures you can always get some
benefit even from items no one in the party wants. The substance can be used in
place of the traditional components for any ritual, no matter what its power
source is. And of course, Enchant Item is a ritual, so you can use it to make
other magic items as well.

## The Numbers

Most rust monsters are Medium Natural Beasts, though Dweomer Eaters are
Large. They have low-light vision.

In earlier editions rust monsters could destroy metal weapons, armor and items
instantaneously, but this has become a more gradual process in 4e. Even so the
MM2 has this big box about being careful with rust monsters, because players
loathe losing their magic loot even more than they fear losing their
PCs.

Usually, at most one of the party's items risks total destruction at the
antennae of a rust monster per fight, though that danger multiplies if you're
fighting more than one and the penalties it inflicts can make fighting the other
monsters in the encounter more difficult than they would otherwise be.


### Rust Monster (Both)

Basic rust monsters are Level 6 Skirmishers with 66 HP. Their speed is 8, so you
can't easily run from them once they catch the scent of your expensive gear.

A rust monster's **bite** does physical damage and rusts any heavy armor the
target might be wearing. Rusting armor has a -1 penalty to AC, and multiple
bites increase this to a maximum of -5. This only lasts until the end of the
encounter.

**Rusting Defense** means attacking the monster with a metal weapon also rusts
it, which inflicts a -1 penalty to attack rolls and is cumulative to a maximum
of -5.

Rusted weapons and armor return to normal after the end of the encounter, so
this is not quite as bad as it looks. However, the monster can target a rusting
weapon or suit of armor with its **Devour Metal** ability (melee 1 vs. Reflex),
which destroys the item in question on a hit!

If the destroyed item was magical, you'll be able to retrieve residuum from the
monster's belly equal to the full value of the item, which doesn't necessarily
ensure you'll get your item back but is still a bit of a consolation prize.

The main difference between books, aside from the usual damage update, is in how
Devour Metal works. The MM2 version only affects magic items of 10th level or
less (or nonmagic items), and is an encounter power. The MV version is actually
more dangerous: it has no level limit and recharges when the monster misses with
it, which means it can keep trying until it manages to destroy something.

Fighting a rust monster still produces that funny inversion effect where the
squishies wearing cloth and bearing wooden weapons move to the front line and
the fighters cower in the back, but now the fighters aren't instantly doomed the
moment the monster slips by the squishies.

### Gluttonous Rust Monster (MV)

This Level 8 Brute has 110 HP, Speed 6, and all the abilities of the basic rust
monster above.

In addition, it has a **Gluttonous Bite** encounter power (melee 1 vs. AC) which
does more damage than the basic bite and rusts the target's weapon and armor at
the same time. On a miss, it does half damage.

### Young Rust Monster Swarm (Both)

This is what you get when a couple of rust monsters nests close to a large
source of metal. The swarm is a Level 9 Soldier with 92 HP. As a swarm, it takes
half damage from single-target attacks and 10 extra damage from area effects. It
can also squeeze through any opening wide enough to allow a single rustling
through.

The swarm has **Rusting Defense** and its **Swarm of Bites** also rusts
armor. Its **Swarm Attack** aura 1 deals 5 damage to enemies caught inside and,
if they have a rusting item on them, slows them for a turn.

### Dweomer Eater (MM2)

Dweomer Eaters are Large, and Level 11 Skirmishers with 110 HP. They work pretty
much like standard rust monsters, with bigger numbers. There is one important
difference, though: their rusting abilities target not metal, but _magic_.

This means that any magic armor or weapon used by the party, no matter what
material it's made from, is at risk when fighting a dweomer eater. Mundane items
are fine, but that is scant consolation for a level 11 party typically clad in
+2 or +3 armor and weapons. Yes, if you hit them with spells channeled through a
magic implement, the implement rusts even if it's made of wood or crystal.

You can still extract residuum equal in value to any items destroyed by a
dweomer eater from its corpse, at least.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The encounters we have in the MM2 place rust monsters alongside creatures which
don't usually employ metal weapons, such as lizardfolk that fight unarmed or
with magic, and certain faeries. I don't think you can train a rust monster not
to eat your metal weapons, so people who rely on steel won't be using them as
pets.

I like rust monsters! The original versions terrified me as a player, but the
kinder implementation here feels just right. A single mistake won't cost you
your hard-won loot, and the GM gets to have a bit more fun by prolonging the
dread.

PCs with Enchant Item can make magic items with a maximum level equal to their
own, so the residuum refund from a slain rust monster makes the loss of such an
item temporary. You usually find items of a higher level than that as treasure,
though. The Essentials rules also introduce the concept of item rarity, which
makes certain items impossible to re-create via ritual. Both of these things
mean some losses are indeed permanent or at least very difficult to replace.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
