---
layout: post
title: "Cyberpunk and Plagues"
tags:
    - gurps
    - opinion
---

## Preface

I've been sitting on this one for a while now. I'm not gonna lie, writing and
publishing those Monster Manual posts is quite soothing. Particularly the
releasing part, which is just a few mechanical actions now that I have so much
pre-written material for it. Every once in a while I'll sit and write something
that's on my mind, and hesitate a bit before posting it. This is one such post,
which I'd say was written somewhere around late April or early May.

## The Post

One of the outtakes from [my last screed against Transhuman Space][1] was a
rebuttal to the bit where it says it's better and more realistic than cyberpunk
because it doesn't have any apocalyptic disasters in its Very Serious history of
the future.

I had had whole paragraphs mapped out in my mind about how yes, the insistence
of 90's cyberpunk RPGs in inserting these catastrophes was kinda silly. About
how they probably had their roots in their authors believing in that "end of
history" bullshit just as hard as the text of Transhuman Space itself did, and
how they couldn't see the future being a shitty place if there wasn't a plague,
a nuclear meltdown, or a big war somewhere in there to muck things up.

It was going to end with an assertion that no, you don't need a big, clear,
forced disaster to head down a bad path. A lot of those cyberpunk tropes (evil
corporations, authoritarian governments disguised as democracies, and so on)
happened all on their own without needing such a push. William Gibson's concept
of the Jackpot, presented in his novel _The Peripheral_, encapsulates all of
this a lot better than Transhuman Space's bright future. Well, he is William
friggin' Gibson, and he had almost twenty extra years of history to look at, but
still.

That post is all ruined now, of course, because it turns out those
disaster-licious 90's games were on to something after all. Here we are, amid a
deadly pandemic that's causing an untold number of tragedies and turning whole
societies upside-down as enforced quarantines and lockdowns push them to change
their habits in a rush. It's not nearly as bad as a genuine 90's RPG disaster,
but, in true Jackpot fashion, it doesn't have to be. It's not the _cause_ of the
evil corps' and authoritarian governments' rise to power, but a _consequence_ of
it. And I don't think either THS or the 90's games would ever have predicted
that rich capitalists would, when faced with a plague, suggest that it was OK to
let vast numbers of people die from it as long as it kept the economy
growing. THS has far too much faith in its Very Smart Neoliberals to suggest
such a thing, and it sounds too bleak even for a 90's-style dystopia.

[^1]: If you're a Fifth Wave eloi.
[1]: {{ "/2019/11/16/on-transhuman-space.html" | relative_url }}
