---
layout: post
title: "'Superheavy' Melee Weapons in GURPS"
tags:
    - gurps
---

Over- and undersized weapons are a popular trope for fantasy and
fantasy-adjacent stories. Those giants and pixies need something to fight with,
and human-scale warriors with huge swords is a itself a popular genre trope.

GURPS already has a pretty good set of cinematic rules for representing
these. The best source of these is the _Scaling Weapons and Armor_ section found
in **GURPS Low-Tech Companion 2: Weapons and Warriors**. GURPS Dungeon Fantasy
uses a limited subset of those in DF1 and 3.

However, there are a few other tropes that mess around with weapon weights in a
supernatural way. Let's take a look at how to represent them in GURPS.

## Superheavy Weapons

This is a melee weapon that's the same size as its mundane counterpart, but it's
a lot _heavier_. It's probably made out of a non-standard material, which
depending on the weapon might be a fruit of superscience or magic. Such weapons
are usually built for legendarily strong wielders! The increased weight not only
makes the weapons more deadly, but also allows its owner to employ their full
strength when fighting.

To model these weapons, use the Scaling Weapons and Armor rules, with a few
modifications:

- Either pick a final weight for the weapon, or note the strength of its
  intended wielder if you already know that.

- Go to page 21 of Low-Tech Companion 2, and pick the line whose "Typical User
  ST" column most closely matches that of the wielder.

- If you started with the weight, divide final weight by the "base" weight of
  the weapon and pick the line whose Weight column is closest to the result.

- Modify the weapon's Damage, required ST, Weight and base cost as written in
  LTC2. _Do not_ modify Reach or SM.

And there you have it! And yes, you can combine this with normal weapon scaling
to make a weapon whose weight is abnormally large for its size. In that case,
you use the procedure above and also multiply the weapon's Reach by the value in
the table row corresponding to the SM of the intended wielder.

**Example 1**: We're making a super-strong martial artist character and we want
him to use an iron quarterstaff that's ten times heavier than the wooden
variety. Looking at the table on LTC2 p. 21, we see that the closest multiplier
is 12.25, for the SM+3 line.

After applying the modified process above, we end up with a weapon that has the
following qualities: Damage sw+7 cr or thr+7 cr; Reach 1, 2; Parry +2; Cost
$122,50; Weight 20kg (40 lbs); ST 25. So our hero would need at least ST 25 to
properly wield such a weapon.

**Example 2**: We're making a pixie barbarian using Dungeon Fantasy rules. Her
ST is 13, which is legendary for a people whose SM is -6 and whose typical ST
score is 5. We want her to wield a weapon that's superheavy _for a pixie_.

The chosen base weapon is a Dueling Halberd. We use the SM -6 row in the table
for the halberd's Reach multiplier, and the SM -2 row for everything else. Our
resulting halberd will weight only a quarter of the human version, but it will
be 25 times heavier than a "standard" pixie polearm, and weight more than its
wielder!

The final stats are: Damage sw+2 cut or sw+2 imp or thr+2 imp; Reach C; Parry 0U
or 0; Cost $30; Weight 1.25kg (2.5 lbs); ST 6++. Note that our super-strong
pixie can wield this halberd one-handed without it becoming unready.

## Magically Attuned Weapons

This trope is popular in the Exalted roleplaying game. Magic weapons in that
setting are inspired both on some tales of classical mythology and on modern
media such as action anime and certain video games. The heroes who wield these
weapons "attune their essence" to them, which makes the weapons feel like they
have normal weight to their owners, while still being superheavy to everyone
else - particularly their targets.

This means that characters wielding these weapons don't have to be generically
super-strong, and that the ability to handle one weapon doesn't give them the
ability to wield others.

To create such a weapon, use the same process outlined above for "superheavy"
weapons. Attunement is represented by a new advantage, which the weapon's owner
must purchase in order to use it.

### Attunement (Variable Cost)

You're attuned to a specific magical weapon which is super-heavy, oversized, or
both. You can wield it just as if it was a normal-sized weapon, though its
targets will still feel the full weight of your blows.

To calculate the cost of this advantage, subtract your actual ST from the
weapon's minimum ST and multiply it by 1.6, rounding up. Add 1 to the total if
the weapon is also oversized.

Attunement in no way "protects" your weapon! If it's permanently lost or
destroyed, you lose all the points invested in it.

_Details_: This is just enough levels of Lifting and Striking ST with the
limitation "Only for this weapon" (-80%) to cover the difference between the
character's ST score and the minimum ST for the weapon. The extra point for
oversized weapons is a specialized version of the Giant Weapons perk that
removes all penalties due to size difference, but only works for that single
weapon.

**Example**: If the Iron Staff from the previous section was a magic artifact in
the style described here, a reedy ST 8 hero could attune to it by paying 28
character points. 25 - 8 is 17, which multiplied by 1,6 gives us 27,5, which is
then rounded up. This allows the hero to fight with the Staff as if he had
ST 25, and to ignore its great weight when carrying it, but he'll still be ST 8
for all other purposes.

## "Whomsoever wields this hammer, should he be worthy..."

The third and final special weapon covered in this article are those powerful
magical artifacts that only allow those they deem worthy to even lift
them. Thor's hammer from the Marvel comics and movies is a famous example.

Lifting and using these weapons is not a matter of muscle mass, but of moral
strength. When you touch they, they judge you! If you pass that judgment, then
you can lift and wield the weapon as if it was a normal specimen of its kind.

You don't actually need to make these weapons superheavy or oversized. Instead,
they look for certain traits in a prospective wielder. Those who have these
traits are worthy. Those who don't can't even lift the weapon, even if they're
the strongest being in the universe muscle-wise. I generally consider this to be
a story effect and wouldn't try to put a price tag on it.

A weapon like movie-Mjolnir might look for one or more virtues along the lines
of Honesty, Selfless, Charitable and so on. An evil weapon would instead look
for Bloodlust or Sadism. They would of course also avoid traits opposite to
those they like.

If the weapon in question is also superheavy or oversized, then it could grant
worthy wielders the ST to use it, similar to how Attunement works, at no cost to
the wielder. If you're writing up the weapon as a character, this would be a
benefficial Affliction granting the Attunement advantage. Simplify its cost by
granting a number of levels of ST equal to the minimum needed to wield the
weapon regardless of the wielder's current ST.

**Example**: The Iron Staff belonged to the Monkey King! Though it will shun
Bloodthirsty, Callous, Greedy or Sadistic individuals, it will deem worthy
anyone who shows its former master's heroic spirit, martial prowess, or love of
mischief. Anyone with at least two of Selfless, a Code of Honor or Higher
Purpose to fight evil, Trained by a Master, Curious, or Trickster could be
deemed worthy and be considered to have ST 25 when wielding the staff.


[^1]: The DFRPG omits them entirely.
