---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Efreet"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-efreet.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Efreets are drawn from Middle Eastern mythology and Islamic tradition, which say
they're a type of djinn often depicted as evil and associated with
death. They've been in D&D at least since the days of First Edition as the
official fire genies (other elements have their own genies as well). They're
present both on the Monster Manual and on the Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Like in most editions, the Efreets in Fourth are fire genies, and are usually
evil antagonists. They come from the Elemental Chaos, where their civilization
is one of the most ordered things in that chaotic plane.

Efreets are giant-sized humanoids with powerful builds, red skin, and curved
horns, part flesh and part smokeless fire. They claim they are the firstborn of
the Primordials and as such are the rightful heirs to their domains and
creations. That doesn't mean they _worship_ the Primordials - Efreets don't
really worship anyone but themselves and intensely dislike being placed in any
position that even resembles servitude.

There is no such thing as an "efreet commoner". Every single one of them is a
noble with their own title, holdings and multitudes of servants and
slaves. Though the number of existing efreets is on the small side, they project
an incredible amount of power from their citadels spun from fire and metal. The
greatest such settlement is the City of Brass, an oasis of stability in the
Elemental Chaos that has stood unchanging since the dawn of time. From there,
the Lord of All Efreets rules their civilization.

Efreet houses constantly scheme against each other, and when one of them wins
such a dispute they usually take a member of the losing house as a servant and
hostage - a fate Efreets consider worse than death. Though they despise
servitude, they're still smart enough to bargain with mortals when doing so
brings them some advantage. That's where the "genies grant wishes" myth comes
from!

You see, Efreets don't actually have the ability to grant reality-bending
wishes. They are however fantastically rich potentates with access to large
multiversal organizations and epic-level magic, which makes the distinction moot
for most mortals.

These elemental nobles also like to organize hunting expeditions to other
planes, going after big game such as dragons or other equivalent creatures just
for the fun of it. It's like a British fox hunt on a grand scale, particularly
when you remember that fox hunters basically acted like raiding hooligans who
wantonly trespassed on people's properties, trampled their livestock, and
threatened complainers with violence in the name of a jolly good bit of sport.

I find the official illustration above to be somewhat innacurate. These efreets
should be wearing fantastic fireproof finery instead of these drab loincloths
and plain mail.

## The Numbers

Most Efreets are early-Epic threats, with some of them going upwards to
late-Epic. They're Large Elemental Humanoids (fire), and they signature traits
are a complete immunity to fire and a Blazing Soul aura 1 increases the ongoing
fire damage taken by any enemy within. They can also fly and hover. The MM
versions have no particular vulnerability to cold, but the MV versions are
slowed for a turn when they take cold damage (a trait called Frozen Fire).

Efreets are all highly intelligent and speak Primordial as their primary
language. They're also trained in all the skills you'd expect a society of
magically-potent nobles to know.

Let's look at them in the order they appear on the Monster Manual.

### Efreet Fireblade

This Level 22 Soldier has 206 HP. Present in both books, the MV version has a
Blazing Soul aura that increases ongoing fire damage by 5, and Frozen Fire. The
MM version lacks both of these traits but is still immune to fire. It runs with
speed 6 and flies with speed 8 (hover).

In both versions the Fireblade wields a scimitar. Its Reach 2 attacks mark the
target for a turn on a hit. It can also throw the scimitar, Jedi-like, as a
Ranged 10 attack that can target 2 creatures within 5 squares of each other
before returning to the efreet's hand, marking each of them for a turn on a
hit. This recharges on a 4-6.

Finally the Fireblade can execute a Whirling Fireblade Strike that recharges on
a 5-6, and targets all enemies on a Close Burst 2. It does scimitar damage plus
10 ongoing fire damage to anyone it hits (save ends).

This monster wants to start its fights by keeping at range and hurling the
scimitar, but it can deal with people in melee just fine.

### Efreet Cinderlord

The Cinderlord is Level 23 Artillery with 169 HP. It has all standard efreet
traits in both versions. Visually the Cinderlord isn't much different than the
Fireblade: a lavislhy-dressed efreet noble with a scimitar. Its powers, however,
are quite different.

That scimitar attack is weak for its level even on the MV, but it does ongoing
fire damage. Its main ranged attack is a Fire Bolt (range 10 on the MM, 20 on
the MV) that does fire damage and ongoing fire damage. It can follow that up
with Fan the Flames, a ranged 20 attack that targets someone taking ongoing fire
damage. It does a bit of automatic fire damage to the target, and triggers a
Close Burst 1 attack centered on the target that target the Reflex of any nearby
bystanders and deals fire damage to those it hits.

Finally there's the Curse of the Efreet, an encounter power that recharges when
the Cinderlord is first bloodied. It's a Ranged attack 10 that somehow targets
AC. On a hit it does both immediate and ongoing fire damage (save ends), and
strips the target's fire resistance completely until the end of the encounter
(no save!). This targetting AC is an interesting detail. Do the cinderlord's
words of malediction take physical form and stab at you?

Curse of the Efreet makes the cinderlord an excellent addition to any party of
all-fire monsters.

### Efreet Flamestrider

This Level 23 Skirmisher has 217 HP and all standard efreet traits. The MM
version uses a scimitar and the MV version a quarterstaff, but they have similar
abilities.

The basic melee attack does physical damage and ongoing fire damage (save
ends). It can also use Firery Grasp, a ranged attack that causes a fiery hand to
appear and hold the target in place. This targets Reflex, and does both
immediate and ongoing fire damage in addition to immobilizing the target (save
ends both). The MV version has Range 5, while the MM one has Range 20! This is
an at-will power, so I think the MV version is more appropriate for a
skirmisher.

The Flamestrider takes its name from its ability to vanish in a puff of smoke
and teleport up to 20 squares to appear next to another fire creature. It can do
this at-will.

### Efreet Pyresinger

We're climbing up the ranks of efreet nobility here! This MM-only monster is a
Level 25 Controller with 233 HP. It has all the standard efreet traits, with its
aura increasing ongoing fire damage by 10 instead of 5.

It attacks with a scimitar that also does ongoing fire damage, and Range 10 Fire
Bolts that target reflex and do the same. Its Fiery Chains are basically a more
powerful version of the Flamestrider's Fiery Grasp, with Range 10 and the
ability to restrain instead of just immobilizing. As a move action, the
pyresinger can then slide the restrained target 1 square. This attack recharges
on a 4-6.

The pyresinger's last power is Sheets of Flame, which sings a pyre into being in
an Area 3 within 20 squares. The 20-foot tall sheets of flame block line of
sight and cause 10 fire damage to anyone who enters or starts their turn in the
area. No duration is given, which I think means they last the whole fight. The
power recharges on a 4-6, which means there's a good chance multiply such pyres
will litter the battlefield.

As an immediate interrupt, the pyresinger can interpose a Fiery Shield between
itself and a ranged attack, taking only half damage from it. The "immediate
interrupt" bit means this only happens once per round.

The pyresinger pairs very well with the flamestrider or other similar
enemies that can ignore the Sheets of Flame and keep moving through them.

### Efreet Karadjin

This big shot is a Level 28 Soldier with 260 HP, present only in the MM. It
lacks the Blazing Soul aura, an oversight that can be easily corrected. It's
also not vulnerable to cold.

The karadjin fights with a Scimitar of Horrendous Flame, which does both
physical and fire damage alongside a heap of ongoing fire damage and
immobilization (save ends both). There's also an ongoing fire damage
_aftereffect_, which means it takes one save to end the immobilization and two
to end the damage. All saves against both effects are at -2. This is the
karadjin's basic attack! Yikes!

As a reaction, the karadjin can perform the above attack against someone who
just hit it with a melee attack. And as a minor action, it can order an
elemental ally it can see within 10 squares to shift.

## Sample Encounters

The Monster Manual has no less than four encounters involving efreets:

- Level 22: 2 fireblades, 1 flamestrider, and 1 glabrezu. Yes, efreets are
  exactly the kind of epic spellcaster that would summon and bind high-end
  demons.

- Level 23: 1 cinderlord, 3 blood fiends, 1 fire titan. Just make blood fiends
  demons already! Fire titans might be among the only elemental creatures
  efreets might respect. A tiny bit.

- Level 25: 1 pyresinger, 1 great flameskull, 1 marilith, and 2 fire titans.

- Level 27: 1 efreet karadjin, 1 pyresinger, 1 glabrezu, 2 dragonborn champions,
  2 great flameskulls. Wow, someone seriously pissed the Lord of All Efreets off
  enough for him to send his personal hit squad.

Generally, efreets can be found alongside almost any high-level elemental
creature, many of which they keep as slaves. Even before the PCs hit the epic
tier, they can find themselves facing the lower ranks of an efreet's forces.

## Final Impressions

I'm sure these details on efreet culture were present in previous editions but
this was my first time being exposed to them. I quite like the whole.

I'm also sure someone already made jokes comparing them with devils too, since
they have red skin, horns, like fire, and are evil. However, it seems to me that
the evil of an efreet is not the cosmic evil of a devil. Rather, it's the evil
of a fantastically wealthy person whose culture prevents them from developing
empathy with anyone from a lower social class.

Mostly you still have plenty of reason to punch them, but this opens the
possiblity that there are efreets out there who managed to turn out Good anyway,
possibly due to converting to worship of a good god. This is both an interesting
development and true to the original stories, which often features djinns of all
kinds who turned good because they converted to Islam.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
