---
layout: post
title: "The Only Good Metaplot"
tags:
    - opinion
    - gurps
    - dnd
---

I'm not much of an "OSR" person. I started playing in the 90's, and while I
played some D&D here and there it was never my main system, and I moved away
from it as soon as I found others I liked more. While I do feel some nostalgia
when looking at some iterations of its rules, reading them again mostly reminds
me why I stopped playing them in the first place.

There's one specific thing that the very earliest editions of that game did that
I feel should be ported to the present unmodified: the way they handled metaplot
and "canonical" NPCs.

Before D&D was even published you basically had two campaigns being run using
draft versions of its rules. There was Dave Arneson's Blackmoor, and Gary
Gygax's Greyhawk. They were separate settings, but as far as I know they were
run in a similar way.

Each had one main GM, and started with an "original" party of players. This
original party goes on adventures, slays monsters, finds treasure. The survivors
level up and become more powerful.

And then new PCs start coming in. Maybe the GM convinces another group of
friends to play on a different day of the week, or the older players roll up new
starting characters for a bit of variety, or maybe they begin playing their
henchmen when they go out on missions of their own. It's likely a combination of
all of the above, happening over an extended period of time.

So now there are multiple PC parties having adventures in the same setting! What
each party does changes the setting in ways that can be felt by the others. If a
party delves a dungeon on Monday, loses a fighter to a gelatinous cube and
retreats, another one might go in there on Thursday and loot the dead fighter's
cool magic sword. If the high-level originals shake the pillars of Heaven on
Saturday, the Monday and Thursday parties might hear about it and feel its
consequences in their games.

And that's metaplot in its original, "platonically ideal" form. It's _what
happens at the table_, propagating to the other PC parties that are pare of the
same gaming group. This is practical because the setting is owned by a single GM
or a small circle of them, who run the games for all groups involved and keep
track of it all. As for "canon NPCs", _there are none_. It's PCs all the way
down, though I suppose some of them might transition fully to NPC status when
they retire, becoming less active in the process.

To me, an ideal setting is one that enables groups to create their very own
shared world in that mold.
