---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Nightwalker"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-nightwalker.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

I think Nightwalkers have been in the game since 3e - at least, that's when I
first saw them along with other "Night-something" high level undead. Here,
they're only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

The Shadowfell is the antechamber of the afterlife. Whenever someone dies, their
spirit spends a time here before the Raven Queen sends it to its final
destination. If an extremely strong-willed evil person dies, though, they might
be able to hold on and stay in the Shadowfell through sheer orneriness. These
eventually become Nightwalkers.

This origin is actually quite similar to those of Devourers, evil people who
also avoid being sent to the afterlife and make new undead bodies for
themselves. Could it be that the two are related? Maybe a Nightwalker is what
you get when a Devourer eats enough souls. Or maybe they're simply the luckier
psychopaths who got to make themselves a body of solid shadow instead of having
to settle for corpse bits.

As mentioned above, Nightwalkers have bodies made out of the stuff of the
Shadowfell. This gives them the ability to control the energies of that plane to
some extent, which manifests as a series of cold and necrotic powers in combat.
They're also expert ritual casters. One of the rituals they know is the one that
makes bodaks, though power-hungry PC wizards will be disappointed to know it
only works on the Shadowfell when cast by a nightwalker on someone they
themselves killed.

Nightwalkers communicate through telepathy, and understand Common. They're
highly intelligent and no doubt always have an evil scheme or two cooking, with
bodaks acting as their agents in these matters.

## The Numbers

Nightwalkers are Large Shadow Humanoids with the Undead keyword. They're Level
20 Elite Brutes with 464 HP and a host of passive traits. Darkvision, immunity
to disease and poison, 20 resistance to cold and necrotic, and 20 vulnerability
to radiant. They walk at speed 8.

They also emit a 5-square aura of **Void Chill**, which does 5 cold and necrotic
damage to anyone caught inside.

The nightwalker's basic attack is a Reach 2 **slam** that does some physical
damage plus bonus cold and necrotic damage. Once per round as a minor action
they can use a **Void Gaze** (close Blast 5 vs Will) which does a bit of
necrotic damage, pushes the targets 4 squares, and give them a -2 penalty to all
defenses (save ends). This is _not_ a fear effect, so protection from fear
doesn't work against it.

Once per encounter, it can use the dreaded **Finger of Death** spell (ranged 5
vs. Fortitude). This can only be used against a bloodied target, but if it hits
the target immediately drops to 0 HP. Necrotic resistance is useless against
this! It's a nice thing to use with an action point as soon as someone becomes
bloodied.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We have two:

- Level 20: 1 nightwalker, 4 bodak reavers. Master and minions!

- Level 22: 1 nightwalker, 1 tormenting ghost, 3 death giants. This would be
  more of a gathering of equals.

Those encounters cover the basics of how you can meet a nightwalker: they bow to
no master, and surround themselves with either servants (all of the bodaks) or
with other creatures they respect as equals.

I like the concept of nightwalkers a lot, though I have to say I prefer the 3e
illustration that included nightcrawlers and nightwings. Those shadowy
indistinct shapes were a lot scarier than the thing pictured here. I can see why
the crawlers and wings didn't make it here - they were basically the same
monster with different shapes and levels. It would be relatively easy to
homebrew them back into the game.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
