---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Gibbering Beast"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Gibbering beasts used to be several different monster entries that originally
appeared throughout AD&D and 3.x in different places. Here they were quite
sensibly collected together. They appear only on the Monster Manual, but
received an MV-style update in Dungeon #192, so we'll look at them there too.

## The Lore

A gibbering beast is a slimy, amorphous, oozelike creature covered in eyes and
mouths. And eyes with mouths. And mouths with eyes. And eyes inside mouths. And
is that a bunch of teeth just kinda sprouting from that quivering protuberance?

They crawl or float around, looking every which way with their eyes and
constantly spouting nonsense from their mouths, which they also use to attack
and eat other creatures. The nonsense can be just as dangerous as the bites, as
it warps the minds of those who hear it and makes them easy prey for the
beast.

The lesser varieties of gibbering beast spontaneously generate when something
dies in places touched by the influence of the Far Realm, which causes the
corpse's face to detach and become a newborn beast. Over time they can grow and
become both smarter and more powerful. Sometimes the strongest varieties travel
directly from the Far Realm to the world, bent on enacting some insane scheme of
their own.

## The Numbers

Gibbering beasts are Aberrant Magical Beasts, and they all have All-Around
Vision and Darkvision. Creatures with All-Around Vision can't be flanked, which
makes it a lot harder to get combat advantage against them.

Their other signature trait is their incessant **Gibbering**, a free action that
happens at the start of their turns: Close Burst 5 vs. Will, a hit dazes the
targets for a turn. Deafened creatures are immune to this.

All Gibbering Beasts are Unaligned, which is very appropriate for truly alien
aberrant entities.

### Gibbering Mouther

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-gibbering-mouther.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The weakest and most classic among these entries, the gibbering mouther is
Medium and a Level 10 Controller with 110 HP. It moves at speed 5 on land, and
can swim at the same speed. Its mere presence warps the space around it, which
works as an Aura 3 that acts as difficult terrain against enemies.

The mouther's basic attack is a **bite** that deals physical damage and ongoing
5 acid damage (save ends). Its **Gibbering** works as described above, and opens
the way for **Gibbering Feast** (Close Burst 5), a power which causes unnatural
mouths to appear on any dazed creatures in the area and perform a basic bite
attack against them. Now _that's_ an aberrant creature! "Your left hand grows a
mouth and tries to eat your face" is top-notch horror imagery.

Gibbering mouthers have Int 4, and are sapient enough to work with other
aberrant or even non-aberrant creatures if they see advantage in doing so. The
Dungeon update is identical aside from the fixed damage numbers and the lack of
the Gibbering Feast's colorful description.

### Gibbering Abomination

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-gibbering-abomination.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


A bigger mouther. It's still Medium, but it's a Level 18 Controller with 168
HP. It's faster and trades some buoyancy for flight, with a land speed of 6 and
a flight speed of 4 (hover, maximum altitude 1).

Its **Unnatural Utterances** work as an Aura 5 that inflicts a -2 attack penalty
on any enemies caught within. They periodically increase in intensity to perform
the standard **Gibbering** attack.

The abomination's basic attack is a Reach 2 **Tentacle** that does immediate
physical and ongoing psychic damage (save ends). It can also stare at you really
hard with the **Eye of Despair** (Ranged 10 vs. Will; Recharge 3-6), which does
psychic damage and immobilizes (save ends).

The gibbering abomination does extra "sneak attack" damage against creatures it
has combat advantage against, but it sadly lacks an extra-creepy ability like
Gibbering Feast. It does have Int 11, meaning it will make more complex (though
no less insane) plans than the mouther. The Dungeon update simply fixes its
damage totals.

### Gibbering Orb

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-gibbering-orb.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


This Huge Level 27 Solo Controller has 1230 HP and has arrived directly from the
Far Realm to do Cthulhu-knows-what. With its Int 17, it's capable of hatching
elaborate schemes. Given that it has a whole suite of _eye rays_, it might give
you an idea of what beholders were like before migrating to the world and being
mutated by the trip. It flies at speed 8 (hover).

The orb's **Merciless Eyes** work like an Aura 5; anyone who starts their turn
inside and visible gets targetted by a random eye ray.

The orb's basic bite attack does damage and causes the mouth that made it to
detach and automatically attack the target again at the start of the orb's
subsequent turns! This lasts until the mouth misses with an attack, at which
point it falls off and rots.

The Gibbering works as for the other monsters, but is a Close Burst 10.

The orb can also spend its standard action to make two different eye ray attacks
in addition to any automatic ones from Merciless Eyes. The orb can choose which
rays it uses when it does this, from the following selection:

1. **Mindcarving**: Ranged 10 vs. Will; psychic damage and daze (save ends).
2. **Fleshtearing**: Ranged 10 vs. Fort; necrotic damage and ongoing
   necrotic damage (save ends).
3. **Bonewarping**: Ranged 10 vs. Fort; physical damage and weakness (save
   ends).
4. **Bloodfeasting**: Ranged 10 vs. Reflex; physical damage and ongoing physical
   damave (save ends).
5. **Farsending**: Ranged 10 vs. Reflex; transported to the Far Realm for a turn; on
   return, takes psychic damage and suffers a -5 penalty to attacks until the
   end of the encounter.
6. **Souleating**: Ranged 10 vs. Will; slows (save ends); worsens to immobilization
   on first failed save; target dies on second failed save.

That's a pretty fearsome selection, and the names do a lot to evoke that body
horror feeling. It's less varied than the rays available to a Beholder Eye
Tyrant, but every ray does damage, there's two different ongoing damage effects
that can stack with each other and a daze to catch people the **Gibbering**
misses.

The farsending ray is also pretty brutal, since it instantly removes a character
from play for the whole next turn and saddles then with a long-lasting attack
penalty. Not _quite_ as bad as death, but worse than a stun effect. And of
course there's a gradual death effect.

Gibbering Orbs are boss battle material for a level 23 or 24 party, and with a
bit of leveling could be promoted to the "campaign end boss" role as one of
those Outer Gods that orbit Azathoth or the equivalent.

The Dungeon update reduces their HP to 984, and the radius of its Gibbering to
the standard 5 squares. It also fixes its damage, increasing it considerably.

## Sample Encounters

Gibbering beasts go well with any other aberrant or aberrant-adjacent creature
(like cultists and such). Even the gibbering mouther knows the value of
cooperation, and they certainly might be bullied into service by more powerful
monsters.

Unlike the other, lesser beasts, gibbering orbs prefer to work alone and don't
seek out alliances. However, their presence generates spontaneous phenomena and
attracts creatures that end up effectively acting as its heralds and harbingers.

The sample encounters in the book are:

- Level 10: 2 gibbering mouthers, 1 foulspawn seer, 2 foulspawn berserkers, and
  1 chuul.

- Level 18: 1 gibbering abomination, 2 nabassu gargoyles, 1 aboleth lasher and 2
  kuo-toa guards.


## Final Impressions

One constant theme in the comments I've been getting in these entries are that
few of the aberrant monsters seen so far seem worthy of that origin, being far
less alien than what someone would expect from the Far Realm.

I feel that if there's one family of monsters worthy of the "Aberrant" title,
it's the gibbering beasts. The Gibbering Orb is awesome in that role, and the
"basic" Gibbering Mouther is actually better at evoking horror than the
abomination, with its "your body grows mouths and tries to eat itself" attack.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
