---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Naga"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-naga.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Nagas are inspired by creatures from Hindu, Buddhist and Jainist
tradition. Stories about them originate from both India and Laos. They've been
in D&D since at least AD&D 1e, and here they're present only in the Monster
Manual.

## The Lore

Nagas are serpentine creatures with humanoid faces, more spirit than flesh. They
are the guardians of sacred places and secret lore, immune to the ravages of
age, hunger, or sleep.

Nagas are sapient, highly intelligent, and possess magical powers. While the
book doesn't specify who exactly summons nagas to guard some secret, I imagine
powerful servants of the gods or other equivalent entities might have the
ability to do so. You'll rarely find a naga guarding an easily accessible place
like a big city temple or the like - remoteness is the first line of defense for
the sites they tend to guard.

Nagas are often fond of treasure, and end up building small hoards out of the
belongings of the interlopers they defeat. Some of them grow to despise their
original mission, and install themselves as divine rulers of primitive reptilian
tribes, over which they seem to have some influence. As you might expect, the
servants of Zehir are among some of the most enthusiastic fans of nagas, though
they're not inherently associated with that deity.

## The Numbers

Nagas are Large Magical Beasts with the Reptile keyword. Their origin is
typically Immortal, but that can vary. They have Darkvision, very high Int
scores, speak several languages, and have plenty of mental skills, such as
Arcana, Insight, History, and so on. Their specific powers vary per stat block,
but there's always something snaky and something magical.

### Guardian Naga

This naga is Level 12 Elite Artillery with 186 HP. In previous editions they
used to be always Lawful Good, but here their alignment is listed as
"any". Presumably it matches that of whoever summoned them as guardians. They
usually guard arcane secrets, rituals, or artifacts, as well as portals to the
Astral Sea. They move at speed 6.

The guardian naga will likely open a fight with **Thunderstrike** (area burst 1
within 20 vs. Fortitude; recharge 5-6), which does thunder damage and dazes on a
hit (save ends). On a miss it still does half damage, with no riders.

From them on it will hit its enemies with **Word of Pain** (ranged 20 vs. Will),
doing psychic damage and immobilizing (save ends). It will likely spread this
around so most PCs are immobilized, and then focus on what it perceives to be
the biggest threats.

If someone manages to get close, it will **Spit Poison** at them (close blast 3
vs. Fortitude; recharge 5-6). This does immediate and ongoing poison damage, and
it also inflicts a -2 penalty to Fortitude and saves (save ends all).

Only when it has no other alternative will the guardian naga fight in melee. Its
only weapon there are weak **Tail Slaps** that do some damage and push 2 squares
on a hit.

### Bone Naga

This skeletal naga is a Level 16 Elite Controller with 328 HP. As an undead
being, it's immune to disease and poison, has Resist 20 necrotic, and Vulnerable
10 Radiant. It rattles along at speed 7.

Despite their sinister looks and undead-ness, bone nagas are Unaligned. Their
mission usually involves guarding dangerous necromantic secrets, or tombs where
some great evil is sealed.

Bone nagas prefer to mix it up in melee, in no small part due to their **Death
Rattle** aura (radius 2) which causes any enemy who starts their turn inside to
be dazed! It reinforces that with its **Death Sway** (Close Burst 3 vs. Will),
which dazes enemies who were previously fine (save ends) and does necrotic
damage to enemies who were already dazed.

It also has a Reach 2 **Bite** it can use, which deals immediate and necrotic
damage (save ends), with a weakness aftereffect (save ends).

### Dark Naga

So named because of its dark-colored scales, this naga is also Evil. That says
nothing about the moral value of what it guards: prophecies, oracles, related
relics and rituals, and Underdark sites. It is probably more likely to set up
one of those cults mentioned in the lore, though.

Dark Nagas are Level 21 Elite Controllers, with 404 HP and speed 8. They're all
about mind effects at close range, starting with **Lure** (Close Burst 5
vs. Will; enemies only). This minor action pulls victims 1 square and dazes them
(save ends), though it does no damage.

**Psychic Miasma** (Close Burst 3 vs. Will; recharge 5-6) _does_ do psychic
damage in addition to its daze effect (save ends). The first failed save here
causes the condition to worsen to stunned (save ends).

Their **tail sting** does poison damage, and is more damaging against dazed
targets. It also slows them (save ends).

In short, the party will have a very hard time staying un-dazed when fighting
these monsters.

### Primordial Naga

The only elemental naga of the bunch (all others are Immortal), this hints that
the first nagas served not the gods, but the primordials. This multi-headed
monstrosity is a Level 25 Solo Artillery with 1200 HP, comparable to an elder
dragon. They guard portals to the Elemental Chaos, and the secrets of the
primordials themselves.

Primordial nagas prefer to maintain a good distance between themselves and their
foes, whom they will bombard with their **fire spit** and with **wind
slams**. The first targets Reflex and does both immediate and ongoing fire
damage. The second does physical damage and pushes the target 2 squares. Both
are minor actions, allowing a stationary naga to make a total of three such
attacks in any combination.

When the PCs close to within 5 squares, it will hit them with a **Freezing
Breath** (close blast 5 vs. Fortitude; recharge 5-6) which does cold damage and
slows (save ends).

And when the PCs finally close to melee, they'll have a nasty surprise:
primordial nagas are actually quite dangerous up close! First there's the
**Energy Cascade** aura (2) which does 10 fire and lightning damage to any
enemies inside. Then there are the **bites**. They might be bit weaker than the
ranged attacks, but the naga can make five of them. If at least three hit the
same target, they also take ongoing acid damage.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

These are the sample encounters:

- Level 12: A guardian naga, 2 fire archon emberguards, 1 stone-eye basilisk.

- Level 16: 1 Bone Naga, 3 shadow snakes.

Nagas usually partner up with other guardian creatures assigned to the same
place, and they can also end up allying or enslaving neighboring creatures to
act as spies and agents, either to help with their mission of protection or to
build a power base and take over the surrounding region. The latter is something
the more evil or ambitious nagas might do.

I like nagas! Their lore has plenty of openings for interactions more complex
than a fight to the death, and they have a nice mechanical flavor.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
