---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Eladrin"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-eidolon.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

I've already talked about eladrin in passing when discussing drow, and now I'm
going to get into more detail on them. They're present in both books, though
they're mixed into the general "Elf" entry on the Monster Vault.

"Eladrin" is one of those names that used to refer to something else entirely in
previous editions. In this case, the name belonged to a set of Chaotic Good
Outsiders from Arcadia, only some of whom resemble elves. Now it belonges to a
playable race that has its roots in the Feywild.

While no D&D player expects elves to be Santa's little helpers, there are
several competing visions of what a "proper" elf should be. Woodsy archers who
wear earth-toned cloaks and shoot bows really well, like Legolas? Ethereal fey
wizards who live in resplendent silver cities, like Galadriel? Several of the
game's settings in previous editions made attempts to accommodate both concepts,
and Eladrin are part of 4e's own effort.

In short: Legolas is an elf, Galadriel is an eladrin.

## The Lore

As we saw with drow, back in the dawn of time there was only a single
"proto-elven" fey people, created by Corellon the god of magic and beauty. They
lived in the Feywild, where they built fantastic empires powered by arcane
magic.

Over time this ancient people underwent something of a diaspora, with part of
them migrating to the world and adapting to its local conditions, becoming the
elves we know today. Some of _those_ would in turn convert to the worship of
Lolth and get driven into the Underdark, becoming the drow.

Those who stayed in the Feywild are known today as the Eladrin. Are they still
the same ancestral fey of legend, or have they undergone changes of their own?
Only your GM can tell.

Eladrin and elves still look somewhat similar, but still have some obvious
visual differences that make distinguishing the two easier. The most striking of
those are the eyes, which are solid orbs of blue, green or violet. Eladrin hair
also tends to be a brilliant white, or a metallic color like silver or
gold. Their skin can be of any tone found in humans, but the lighter tones are
more common. Less obviously, eladrin also tend to be a bit taller than elves,
and they're longer-lived.

Most eladrin live in those fabulous Feywild cities, which are usually built in
places that touch the world with some frequency. Thus they're a common enough
sight in the world to justify their inclusion as a playable character option.

Your typical eladrin citizen has a somewhat detached view of the world,
particularly since their cities weren't affected by any of the bad stuff that
took down Nerath. Still, that typical citizen is still pretty relatable all
things considered.

The higher-up an eladrin is in their society, the more magically powerful and
weird they tend to be. Eladrin nobles are fully involved with the Fey Courts,
taking titles relating to the seasons or other abstract concepts. The most
powerful among them are quite likely to have become true fae and be the sort of
entity who makes pacts with warlocks.

## The Numbers

The Monster Manual and Monster Vault give us four eladrin stat blocks each. Two
of them (the Fey Knight and Twilight Incanter) appear in both books. The ones in
the Monster Vault are clustered around the late-Heroic tier, but the ones in the
MM start there and go all the way to epic. All the MM ones have an alignment of
"Any", while the MV ones are listed as unaligned. In either case this means they
can be either enemies or allies depending on the specific individuals that
appear in your stories.

All eladrin are Medium Fey Humanoids, and their most famous signature trait is
Fey Step, an encounter power which allows them to teleport 5 squares as a move
action. They also have low-light vision, and a +5 bonus to saves against charm
effects.

### Eladrin Bow Mage

The bow mage is Level 7 Minion Artillery. It has Speed 6, is trained in
Perception and carries a magic bow that fires Force Arrows: Ranged 20 vs. AC, a
hit does force damage and pushes 1 square. These wouldn't be stealthy
tree-climbing snipers, but rather battlefield archers that fire in
formation. You'll want to have then in a _loose_ formation, though, to avoid
those area-effect attacks.

### Eladrin Fey Knight

This one exists in both books. It's a Level 7 Soldier with 77 HP. It wears mail,
and wields a light shield and a longsword.  The MV version is clearly the best
of the two, so let's start with that.

The fey knight cuts a striking presence in the battlefield, projecting a Feywild
Tactics aura in a 5-square radius that allows allies in range to score criticals
on a roll of 19-20 rather than just on a natural 20. There are very few
abilities in 4e that mess with critical range - IIRC this is the first one I've
seen on this Let's Read.

Beyond the basic longsword attack, the fey knight can also attack with a Stab of
The Wild: Recharge 5-6, Melee 1 vs. AC, a hit does more damage than the basic
attack and restrains the target for a turn with what I assume are entangling
vines. As a minor action it can issue a Feywild Challenge to mark a target
within a Close Burst 5. It's kinda like a paladin mark, lasting until the end of
the encounter or until the knight uses the challenge again, and dealing a bit of
radiant damage to the target when it doesn't attack the eladrin on its turn.

The fey knight can also protect its allies with Harvest's Sorrow, an immediate
interrupt that allows it to take half the damage of an attack directed at an
ally within 5 squares. It of course also has Fey Step.

The MM version is similar but a bit clunkier aside from the damage bug. Stab of
The Wild works the same but the knight can't use its sword while a target is
entangled. Feywild Challenge has a range of 10 but is an encounter power. Use
the MV version if possible.

These are knights, so you can probably give them some sort of gallant fey steed
if you need to. They're the ones fighting at the front and protecting that unit
of bow mages, and also make up the core of a noble's guard detail.

### Eladrin Twilight Incanter

This wizard is a Level 8 Controller with 82 HP, present in both books. It wields
a spear in combat, and its strikes slow the target for a turn in addition to
doing damage. Since the incanter is a Controller, its spear attack actually has
decent accuracy and damage!

The incanter is also dangerous at range, with a suite of spells. Binding Bolt
(Ranged 5 vs. Reflex) does force damage and immobilizes for a turn. On a miss,
it instead slows for a turn. Teleporting Bolt (Ranged 5 vs. Reflex) does force
damage and teleports the target 3 squares on a hit. On a miss it still teleports
the target 1 square. Its final spell is Dazzling Blast (recharge 5-6, close
blast 3 vs. Will), which does radiant damage and blinds for a turn on a hit.

The MM version has Range 10 on the bolt spells, and specifies that Teleporting
Bolt can't teleport someone to an unsafe square. That's just no fun, so I see
why it's gone from the MV version. I suppose the teleport victim can still roll
a save to throw itself at an adjacent safe square at the last minute, as
standard for forced movement.

### Eladrin Battle Dancer

This is a MV-only Level 9 Skirmisher. It has speed 6 despite wearing mail, and
fights with a longsword. The basic sword attack, named Dancing Blade, causes the
battle dancer to become invisible to the target for a turn! It also has a Battle
Dance encounter power that allows it to shift its speed and perform a basic
attack against any enemies it passes adjacent to.

It seems the Battle Dancer has also put some extra practice into its
teleportation, for it replaces the usual Fey Step with a _Surprise_ Fey
Step. The range is the same, but it recharges on a 3-6 and grants the dancer
combat advantage against every enemy it appears next to.

### Bralani of Autumn Winds

The MM sends us right into the late Paragon tier! A bralani used to be a type of
outsider in 3.x, but now it's apparently a rank in the fey courts. This
wind-themed noble is a Level 19 Controller with 180 HP. It has Resist 20 Radiant
and is vulnerable to necrotic damage, which slows it for a turn. The bralani is
surrounded by the Cloak of Autumn Winds, an aura 5 that makes its enclosing
volume difficult terrain for enemies - even if they're flying.

Its basic longsword attack does nothing special aside from the damage, but once
per encounter the bralani can curse someone with Autumn Chill (Ranged 5
vs. Will), which weakens the target until the end of the encounter! It can also
use an at-will Whirlwind Blast (Close Blast 5 vs. Fortitude). On a hit this does
thunder damage and pushes targets 2 squares (3 on a critical). On a miss it
still does half damage.

### Ghaele of Winter

A bit higher up in the totel pole is the **Ghaele of Winter**, Level 21
Artillery with 134 HP. It has 25 cold and radiant resistance, and the same
necrotic vulnerability described for the bralani. This ghaele is, well, an
Elsa. Its basic attack is Winter's Touch, which does cold damage. It can cast
Freezing Rays (Ranged 12 vs. Reflex) that do cold damage and slow (save ends).

It can create bursts of Chilling Defiance (Close Burst 3) at will, which hit
automatically, do a flat 10 cold damage and slow for a turn. For each target
that takes damage from this, the ghaele regains 2 HP. It can also command
someone to let it go with its Imperious Wrath (minor action, Close Burst 3
vs. Will), which dazes targets _until the end of the encounter_. This recharges
whenever the ghaele regains 4 HP or more from a single casting of Chilling
Defiance. Fey Step rounds out its abilities.

So yeah, this is an artillery monster you do _not_ want to go near.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

There is one sample encounter here, but thematically, it's a doozy: Level 21, 1
ghaele of winter and 4 wild hunt hounds. Yup, the Wild Hunt exists in this
setting, and it's run by and for the less friendly sort of epic-level eladrin.

As far as attempted solutions to Elf Overload go, I like eladrin a lot. Their
name doesn't include the word "elf" anywhere, making it a bit easier to remember
which is which. They're an entirely different race mechanically, which is a
better solution than others I've seen that ended up loading up a single "elf"
race with bonuses related to both concepts. They're also really atmospheric on
their own, of course, and allow players to portray genuine fae folk from level 1
if they so choose.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
