---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Roper"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-roper.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Ropers are D&D originals as far as I know, and have been in the game since at
least AD&D first edition. They're one of a number of monsters meant to look like
innocuous bits of scenery which Gygax and other authors likely invented as their
players became savvy to their usual opposition. They're on both the Monster
Manual and the Vault in this edition.

## The Lore

Ropers are ambush predators who live in the Underdark and sometimes in caves
closer to the surface. Their rocky skin and conical shape makes them very
similar to the sort of geological formation you can find in these environments,
and they can slowly crawl and position themselves in either cavern floors or
ceilings. Unlike many Underdark denizens, their distant origins lie in the
Elemental Chaos rather than in the Far Realm. They're technically earth
elementals!

A roper will sit tight and look like a stalactite/stalagmite until some likely
prey wanders into the reach of its long tentacles, at which point they'll whip
out, grab the victim, and pull them into the creature's maw. Aside from their
natural camouflage and weapons, ropers have another thing going for them:
they're sapient and actually fairly intelligent. While most will eat anything
and anyone, some have specific tastes in prey, such as humans or elves.

In both cases, a roper might make deals with other creatures that live near its
chosen hunting grounds, promising not to eat them in exchange for being allowed
to position itself at a prime spot in their territory. If that territory gets
invaded (either by one of the many hostile Underdark factions or by PCs), the
roper and its allies will generally cooperate in its defense, with the roper
getting to eat the bodies later.

## The Numbers

Ropers are Large Elemental Magical Beasts with the Earh keyword. They all have
darkvision and are immune to petrification. They have ground and climb speeds of
only 2, with Spider Climb allowing them to stick to ceilings. This means they're
not going to be moving much during a fight, but they can position themselves
just fine outside of it.

All ropers can do something grabby with their tentacles and something horrible
to grabbed victims, but the exact mechanics vary per stat block. Tentacles
usually have a fantastic melee reach of 10.

The Monster Manual only has the one roper stat block, but the MV has
three. We'll look at them in order of level.

### Impaling Roper (MV)

A relatively simple creature compared to its relatives, the Impaling Roper is a
Level 10 Lurker with 84 HP and the standard traits described above. It's trained
in Stealth.

Its **Tentacles** (melee 10 vs. Reflex) do very little damage, but also grab on
a hit (escape DC 26). Grabbing a victim grants the roper Resist 20 to all of
that victim's attacks for a turn. Anyone (including the victim) can attack the
grabbing tentacle, which has the same defenses as the roper. A hit here does no
damage but causes the creature to release the victim.

If the victim is still grabbed when the roper's next turn comes up, it can
**Impale** them (melee 10 vs. Reflex). A hit pulls the victim adjacent to the
roper, does a ton of physical damage, and ends the grab. A miss does the same
thing, but only half damage.

I'm guessing this roper looks more like a round spiky rock than the usual
conical shape.

### Cave Roper (MV)

This is a Level 12 Elite Controller with 252 HP and all standard roper
traits. It's pretty much the classic roper.

Cave ropers have a couple of passive traits: **Tentacle Release** is the same
"attack the tentacle to free a victim" mechanic we had as part of the Impaling
Roper's basic attack. **Stony Body** is what allows the roper to disguise itself
as a rocky formation by closing its eye and retracting its tentacles. The
Perception DC for spotting the ruse is 28.

The roper's **Tentacles** (melee 10 vs. reflex) do level-appopriate damage and
grab the target with a DC 20 escape DC. While grabbed, the target is also
weakened. With **Double Attack** it can make two tentacle attacks in an action.

They can also **Bite** an adjacent grabbed victim, an attack vs. AC that does a
ton of damage on a hit and half that on a miss. This roper's bites _don't_ end
the grab.

To bring those victims within bite range, the roper can use minor actions to
**Reel** them in, an attack vs. Fortitude that pulls the victim 5 squares on a
hit.

### Roper (MM)

The Monster Manual roper is a Level 14 Elite Controller with 284 HP. It's
functionally identical to the Cave Roper above, with the main differences being
from mechanical adjustments between books. The DC to spot its Sony Body disguise
is 30, and since there's no listed DC to escape is grabs, you have to use either
its Fortitude of 29 or its Reflex of 21 depending no which skill you choose.

There's nothing here you can't get in a better format by leveling up a cave
roper to level 14.

### Crag Roper (MV)

Crag Ropers are Level 15 Elite Soldiers with 304 HP. They have all the standard
traits mentioned above, plus the usual Stony Body (DC 30 to spot). They also get
a **Lashing Tentacles** aura 5 to support their soldierly role: any enemy inside
is considered marked.

I think there might be some mistake in the crag roper's attacks. Their
**tentacles** skip the grabbing mechanics and just pull the target 5 squares in
addition to doing damage. However, their **bites** can only target grabbed
targets, and they have a **Reel** ability, both of which work like the cave
roper's. They can also make two tentacle attacks per action.

As written, the crag roper has a hard time using either Reel or its bite, since
it has to resort to a generic, damage-less grab action to grab someone. I would
suggest either replacing the pull effect from the tentacles with a grab, or
removing both Reel and the targetting restriction from the bite, making it into
a Melee 1 attack with the same stats and effects.

The crag roper's final attack is **Tentacled Retaliation**, a reaction that
triggers when a marked enemy tries to ignore the roper's mark and attack someone
else. It gives the monster a free tentacle attack against the enemy.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions.

We have two level 14 encounters in the MM, one with a roper collaborating with a
mind flayer and its two war troll thralls, and one with a drow war party. This
tells us ropers will work with anyone who gives them a good deal, and have no
specific allegiance to any of the big Underdark factions.

Ropers are fine, I suppose, but I never really saw them as the sort of monster
that absolutely must be present in a book. Even though I kinda get the editorial
intention of the Monster Vault, I'm still a bit baffled as to why it dedicates
so much space to the roper as opposed to, say, fomorians, which are not present
here at all.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
