---
layout: post
title: "De-monk-ifying Dungeon Fantasy"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - dnd
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/marching-fire.jpeg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Is this guy a Martial Artist? A Swashbuckler? A Knight? Yes.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Dungeon Fantasy has the Swashbuckler template. Swashbucklers are physical
combatants who prioritize mobility and precision over heavy armor and brute
strength. They use a specialized set of weapons, are obsessed with improving
their skill, and strive to learn secret techniques of legendary reputation and
effectiveness.

Dungeon Fantasy also has the Martial Artist template. Martial artists are
physical combatants who prioritize mobility and precision over heavy armor and
brute strength. They use a specialized set of weapons, are obsessed with
improving their skill, and strive to learn secret techniques of legendary
reputation and effectiveness.

Yes, those descriptions use most of the same words. When you look at these two
professional templates from a large enough distance, they really are two takes
on the same concept. They could, in theory, be represented by the same
template. The reason Martial Artist is a separate archetype in Dungeon Fantasy
is because Monk is a separate class in D&D.

And the reason Monk is a separate class in D&D, as far as I can tell, is because
of a particular set of media cliches that have surrounded the words "martial
arts" in a lot of media contemporary with earlier editions of D&D. I guess you
could call it a form orientalism[^1].

In some of these media sources, "martial arts" are this mysterious and exotic
secret from the mysterious and exotic East, much more sophisticated than the
crude flailings of Western barbarians. Knowing it makes you more "enlightened"
and gives you superpowers.

In others, they're this fancy dance for pansies that's totally ineffective in a
"true" fight, because a Real Man knows he just has to punch the other guy. The
Real Man in this scenario is of course always a man, and always Western too.

D&D monks were originally based on this character named Remo Williams, the
protagonist of the Destroyer series of novels. These novels came out in the 70s,
and they were very much in the "exotic secret that gives you superpowers"
camp. Williams learned a fictional martial art from an exotic foreign master and
proceeded to use it to defeat a string of (usually Asian) bad guys. D&D writers
applied a "shaolin" veneer to the class in later editions but many monk
abilities are still based on stuff Williams did in the novels.

GURPS replicated this in Dungeon Fantasy because it tries to replicate D&D, but
its "default" approach to martial arts turns out to be a lot better in my
opinion. It has a supplement named GURPS Martial Arts that treats historical
styles from all over the world with the same level of respect. The message
contained in its rules seems to be that these styles are all different
expressions of the same thing[^2]. How good an individual combatant is matters a
lot more than where his techniques come from. I really liked that when I first
read it, and I've only grown to like it more over the years. It kinda bothers me
to see a game that still treats the subject in that older "Destroyer" way.

Every character who practices a fighting style and trains to improve their skill
at it is a martial artist by definition, no matter _where_ that fighting style
comes from. Whether that training gives you superpowers has always been more of
a genre or campaign "setting" than something that should be assigned to
individual character types.

In the case of the dungeon fantasy genre, that particular setting is obviously
stuck on "yes". Every PC can perform impossible feats of badassery, that has
been a given since the very beginning[^3]. Someone who comes from a culture that
talks about things in terms of Chi will likely describe any such character as
possessing "strong chi". Someone who doesn't will just describe them as being
really good at fighting. This in no way changes the fundamentals of how their
abilities work.

So here's what I'm going to do in my campaigns from now on.

## Demonkified Dungeon Fantasy

Chi Mastery no longer exists as a specific power. There is no Chi Talent, and
all its component abilities lose the power modifier along with the associated
discounts and drawbacks.

If you only have access to the DFRPG, do this instead: if a former Chi ability
is described as "working like" another trait, you can buy that trait
instead. For example, Tough Skin instead of Dragon Skin, and Striking ST instead
of Mantis Strike. For abilities that have no parallel... keep the same cost,
it's simpler. In all cases you no longer get a bonus for Chi Talent, but you
also no longer need Disciplines of Faith: Chi Rituals to keep them either.

The Swashbuckler and Martial Artist become related templates. A Swashbuckler
gains access to the Martial Artist's abilities and power-ups, and
vice-versa. Characters of each template might still look and behave very
differently on a role-playing level, but there isn't any fundamental difference
in their mechanics any more. The 30 points that would go to Chi Talent in the
Martial Artist template are instead avaialble to be spent on any template
advantages or skills. And there you go!

If you're also using [Streamlined Mastery][1], this means that a PC built using
the Martial Artist template could start off with True Master and Iron Limbs for
the same cost as the official Trained By a Master and Chi Talent 2 advantages.

### What about Knights?

Everything I said about monks and swashbucklers in my introduction applies
equally well to Knights and the other "fighty" templates. However, I still want
to keep it as a separate template because it's good to still have _some_
guidance when building characters!

"Combatant who prefers strength and heavy gear" is different enough from
"combatant who prefers precision and speed" to remain a useful distinction. I'd
still allow some judicious cross-aisle shopping for traits that make sense for a
specific PC.

Heck, combining this with some form of [Agnostic Dungeon Fantasy][2] (where
either no spellcaster is a priest or they all are) would leave us very close to
ditching templates entirely, or at least having a collection of "classes" that's
much closer to that of the oldest of old D&Ds: "warrior" and "magic user". Maybe
I'll try that some day.

### What About the Path?

One of the side-boxes in the Dungeon Fantasy Companion 2 introduces the notion
of The Path, an alternate progression scheme that a Martial Artist PC can opt
into at character creation. Basically, it makes your Chi Talent levels limit how
many levels you can have in certain traits. As a result those limits are lower
to start with, but with enough time and points they can end up much higher.

I think The Path is more appropriate for a campaign that does the reverse of
what I'm trying to do here, where _everyone_ uses chi mechanics. I'll leave it
out of my games for now and maybe write about it at a future date.

[^1]: Though of course I'm not an expert on the subject and will gladly defer to
    people who are.

[^2]: Yes, Bruce Lee said this, and yes, the book does talk about him with great
    admiration.

[^3]: Don't even try to bring the Guy at the Gym fallacy into this. The guy at
    the gym will never have 200 HP or be able to fight 50 goblins without
    breaking a sweat.

[1]: {{ "/2021/05/27/masterful-combat.html" | relative_url }}

[2]: {{ "/2017/08/30/agnostic-dungeon-fantasy.html" | relative_url }}
