---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Golem"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Golems showed up in the first MM and were iconic enough to later make it to the
Monster Vault. I covered those [here][2], and you can check that same post to
see their basic lore. The Monster Manual 2 brings us yet more golems, which
share the same basic lore.

As before, golems are Natural Animates with the Construct keyword. They're
immune to disease, poison, and sleep. They have darkvision, and though their
ground speed tends to be high they cannot shift. Most are Large, but one of the
examples here is Huge.

## Bone Golem

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-golem-bone.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Bone golems are made from the skeletons of several creatures, whose bones are
sharpened and fitted together to form the construct's body. Despite being made
of bones and beloved of necromancers, it's a construct animated through
elemental magic and not an undead monster. Throw this one into an encounter that
does have undead skeletons in it, and it should be good to surprise your PCs a
bit.

Bone Golems are Level 12 Elite Brutes with 302 HP. It's so spiky the pointy bits
count as a **Bone Spikes** aura (1) that deals 5 damage to any enemy that enters
it. The pointy bits also justify the **Osseous Retaliation** trait, which deals
a bit of automatic damage to anyone who hits the golem with an opportunity
attack.

This construct fights with Reach 2 **Bone Spurs**, and can attack twice per
action with them. It can also fire a **Bone Volley** (burst 3 vs. Reflex,
recharge 6+) that deals heavy physical damage and dazes (save ends).

When the golem is destroyed **Bone Death** allows it to make one last
attack. If Bone Spurs is charged then it uses that, otherwise it makes a basic
bone spur attack.

## Chain Golem

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-golem-chain.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These Huge golems are modeled after chain devils, and are often tasked to guard
prisons and Actual Dungeons instead of the usual tombs or treasure vaults. As
you might have guessed, their fighting style is very grapple-intensive.

Chain Golems are Level 22 Elite Soldiers with 418 HP, a speed of 8, and all
standard golem traits. Their **Entangling Chains** act as an aura (3) that slows
everyone caught inside.

Their basic attack is a Reach 3 **Chain** that does physical damage and pulls
the target 2 squares. **Chain Smash** is their double attack power, allowing it
to attack two different targets in one action. While they're bloodied, **Berserk
Attack** allows them to make a chain strike against anyone who damages them as a
reaction.

All that and we didn't even use the grappling rules yet! We have to do that for
**Chain Grab**, though. This at-will attack is a Close Burst 2 that does the
same damage as the basic strike, pulls targets 1 square, and grabs them. The
escape DC is 32 or 35 depending on the skill you use. The golem can move away
from the grabbed victims without ending the grab because chains. Once it
finishes moving it can either slide the victims next to itself or let them go.

So your typical chain golem will try to keep the whole party grabbed while it
smacks them around with its chains. PCs who aren't grabbed will still be slowed,
and the golem's strikes will pull them back if they try to run away. Staying far
away and using ranged attacks is a good tactic against them, but that speed of 8
will make keeping away a real chore.

## Clay Golem

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-golem-clay.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Clay Golems were one of the original golem types described in the first entries
back in AD&D or in the nebulous times before it. They were originally inspired
by the legend of the golem of Prague, and so were the only golem that required
divine magic to make (all the others were arcane).

In Fourth Edition, [eidolons][3] are used to represent divine constructs, so
clay golems have the same arcane/elemental origin as the other types. They have
a somewhat "runny" appearance, but are surprisingly fast and retain a slightly
less harsh version of the ability to inflict unhealing wounds that they had in
previous incarnations.

Stat-wise, they're Level 15 Elite Brutes with 368 HP, Large size, a speed of 6,
and all common golem traits. Their basic attack is a Reach 2 **Slam** that does
heavy physical damage and curses the target, making it unable to regain HP. This
is a (save ends) condition, but it's still quite dangerous, since it makes
wounds inflicted by _all_ enemies unhealing, not just the golem's. **Clay
Smash** allows it to slam two different targets in one action, and they have the
same Berserk Attack reaction as the chain golem above.

Their **Hasty Reaction** passive trait allows them to roll initiative twice and
take the highest result, and **Unstoppable** is a move-action encounter power
that allows them to move 8 squares and pass through enemy spaces. They draw
opportunity attacks when doing this, but reduce their damage by 10. This isn't
worded like a resistance, so I guess powers that bypass or reduce resistances
don't work against it.

## Iron Golem

These made it into the MV, so we already covered them. The MM2 has two versions,
the Level 20 one that we saw, and a Level 26 "Iron Golem Juggernaut" that's
basically the same aside from being size Huge and having bigger numbers.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Each kind of golem presented here gets a sample encounter. I guess there was
something of an editing snafu here, because most golems have their encounter
listed right after their stats, but the one for chain golems is all by its
lonesome in an "Encounter Groups" section at the end of the overall entry. I
guess it must be there because it has two golem types in it.

- Level 13: 1 bone golem, 4 horde ghouls (minions), 1 human wizard lich. So
  that's the kind of caster who makes bone golems.

- Level 15: 1 clay golem, 1 shadar-kai gloom lord, 2 shadow snakes. A Zehiri
  operation, if you still want to associate clay golems with clerics.

- Level 21: 1 chain golem, 1 dark naga, 1 iron golem. Someone _really_ wanted
  this place guarded.

- Level 24: 1 iron golem juggernaut, 1 storm gorgon, 1 djinn skylord. A noble,
  his pet, and his mechanical manservant.

There's a point past which adding more golem types feels a bit redundant. There
are also so many non-golem constructs out there that I almost think "golem"
should be a singular monster type with very specific characteristics, rather
than a whole family of them. Otherwise it would be best to do away with the term
entirely.

[2]: {{ "/2020/04/30/golem.html" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2020/02/12/eidolon.html" | relative_url }}
