---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Myconids"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-myconid.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Myconids have been in the game since AD&D as one of its most famous "novelty
humanoids". They make their 4e debut here in the MM2.

## The Lore

Myconids are sapient fungal humanoids who originated in the Feywild. The
fomorians did _something_ to them in the distant past, and they still bear the
scars of that corruption. In our narrative present they can be found in deep
caves or the Underdark both in the world and in the Feywild. Their preferred
environment are underground mushroom forests that provide them with a complete
ecosystem to live in, but they also have an instinctive need to multiply and
spread and so can be found in less ideal conditions as well.

Myconids communicate by releasing special spores laced with emotions and
sensations, which only other myconids can understand. Only one individual in
each of their colonies, known as the "Sovereign", can communicate with outsiders
through telepathy.

These mushroom-people aren't evil, but their expansionist instinct, difficulty
with communication, and the fact that they live in the friggin' _Underdark_
means they tend to engage in conflict with anyone they come across. They often
end up enslaved by drow, fomorians, and shadar-kai.

Peaceful interaction with myconids is predictably hard - you have to reach the
sovereign, which means infiltrating the heart of their territory or letting
yourself be captured and hoping they take you there.

## The Numbers

Myconids are Fey Humanoids with the Plant keyword. Sovereigns are Large,
everyone else is Medium. They have Tremorsense 10, which allows them to operate
well in total darkness. Their signature trait is **Roots of the Colony**, a free
action that triggers when they're hit by an attack and allows them to split half
the damage between themselves and a myconid ally within 5 squares. Given they're
level 3-4, this is likely to be the party's first encounter with something
resistant to focus fire.

### Myconid Rotpriest

Myconid culture isn't well-understood enough for people to know if they worship
something, but rotpriests kinda fulfill the "healer" role usually taken up by
clerics in other species. They do so in a much more self-sacrificing way,
though.

Rotpriests are Level 3 Brutes with the Leader keyword and 48 HP. They have a
speed of 5, and Regeneration 5 that can be temporarily disabled by radiant
damage. They fight with **stipe staffs** in melee and can also release
**decomposing sprays** to deal necrotic damage in a Close Burst 3.

They have Roots of the Colony like every other myconid, and when another myconid
uses this ability to deal damage to them, rotpriests can use **Sacrifice for the
Colony** to take all of the damage from the trigerring attack instead of just
half. The idea is that they then heal this using their regeneration.

When they finally get killed, they release a **Life Burst** that heals every
living creature in a Close Burst 1 for 10 HP. This includes both monsters and
PCs!

### Myconid Sovereign

Each colony has one of these acting as its leader. As mentioned before,
sovereigns are the only myconids with any ability to communicate with
outsiders. They're Level 4 Controllers with the Leader keyword and 58 HP. If
forced into a fight they can defend themselves with **Slams** and with a variety
of interesting spore bursts.

The default **Spore Burst** is a close blast 3 that targets the Will of
nonplants and deals poison damage. There's also **Commanding Spores**, which
allows a plant ally within 5 squares to shift 1 square. Sounds like a waste of a
standard action, but it can set up some interesting flanks.

A Sovereign should stay a bit away from the main scrum, spraying it with its
spore pesticides and helping keep the PCs surrounded.

### Myconid Guard

Though it's the last monster in the entry, guards are likely to be the most
numerous foes the party meets. They're the rank and file of the colony's
protectors. Guards are Level 4 Soldiers with 56 HP.

They fight with **spiny strikes** from their fists, and can release
**pacification spores** in a close burst 1 that target enemies' Wills, do poison
damage, and prevent those hit from taking standard actions during their next
turns. Fortunately, this is only an encounter power. Roots of the Colony is the
last trick on their arsenal.

Front-liners are going to have a bit of a bad time facing down myconid guards,
since the guards can stagger their spore releases to keep the PCs from attacking
for a while.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Myconids can live in any place that provides good conditions to mundane fungi,
such as damp caverns, surface forests, and so on. Encounters with them can
involve any wildlife that also lives in these places, either as "third parties"
or perhaps as pets if the wildlife is also fungal. They can also be found
alongside the several people who enslave their colonies, though in that case you
might need to perform some level adjustments.

The sample encounters are an all-myconid party that has just ran into a
deathjump spider (level 3); a pair of myconid guards minding an arbalester for
their bosses near a patch of green slime (level 4); and a geonid accompanied by
a pair of rust monsters and another of rotpriests (level 5).

I like these mushroom people, and I like making then relatively friendly once
the PCs manage to breach the communications gap.
