---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Vine Horror"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-vine-horror.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2012 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

One of the many plant monsters of D&D, I'm not sure where vine horrors first
appeared. They look like a 3e thing but could have been in a supplement for an
earlier edition. Here, they're only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

Like shambling mounds, vine horrors are created "naturally" through an unlikely
sequence of events. If an evil person dies in an area touched by the Shadowfell,
their blood might end up soaking the earth and infusing the local plant life,
which animates as a new vine horror. They're undead-adjacent, but not undead
themselves.

Vine horrors are humanoid plant masses who bear a vague resemblance to the dead
person whose blood gave them life. Some times they even display some of that
person's abilities: for example, a vine horror who rises from a wizard might be
able to cast a few spells.

Personality-wise, they display human level intelligence and tend to be cruel
serial killers. The books say they like to ambush and kill passing sapients, but
doesn't make any mention of them _needing_ to do it. It would make sense if they
needed to keep draining blood to live, but it also fits to say that a vine
horror feeds on soil and sunlight just like any other plant and just kills
people because it likes to.

## The Numbers

Vine horrors are Medium Natural Humanoids with the Plant keyword. They have
blindsight, a land speed of 6 with both swamp and forest walk, and a swim speed
of 6.

A vine horror's humanoid shape isn't a constant - they're **Malleable** enough
to squeeze into any 1-inch or wider opening without slowing down at all. They
have **claws**, and can also partially uncoil to strike their victims with vines
whose exact effects vary by stat block.

### Vine Horror

The basic model is a Level 5 Controller with 67 HP. Aside from its basic
**claws**, it can use its **Vicious Vines** once per encounter. This Close Burst
5 vs. Reflex restrains and does 10 ongoing damage on a hit (save ends both).

Its Stealth training, varied movement modes and malleability ensure the horror
will be a in a good position to use Vicious Vines as a fight-opener. After that,
it and its buddies can go to town on the weakened party.

### Vine Horror Spellfiend

An example of a wizard-derived horror who can cast some spells. It's Level 7
Artillery and has 65 HP. It can only use **claws** in melee, but has a lot of
ranged options.

**Shock Orb** (ranged 10 vs. Reflex) does lightning damage. **Lashing Vine of
Dread** (ranged 5 vs. Reflex; fear) does physical damage and pushes the target 5
squares on a hit. **Caustic Cloud** (area burst 1 within 10 vs. Fortitude) does
immediate and ongoing acid damage, and also blinds (save ends both).

Looks like spellfiends pair wonderfully with shambling mounds, since their
at-will lightning powers can heal the mounds. They can also use their fear vines
to herd the party into position for Caustic Cloud, a process that's a lot
quicker if you have a pair of spellfiends in the encounter group instead of just
one.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The book does mention the possible shambling mound partnerships, but the example
encounter it gives is a little less synergistic: Level 9, 2 spellfiends, 1 bog
hag, and 2 trolls. A clever party might be able to turn those caustic clouds to
their advantage.

Story-wise vine horrors don't do much for me. They're just one creepy plant
monster among many others. Mechanically, I'd like to see how an encounter
featuring spellfiends and shambling mounds would go.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
