---
layout: post
title: "Popcorn Initiative in GURPS"
image: /assets/pop-corn.jpeg
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/pop-corn.jpeg" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

GURPS uses a fairly traditional initiative system to determine who goes first in
combat. Like all such systems, it works well for "real-time" gaming, but it
tends to get in the way of good "flow" for a Play-by-Post or other asynchronous
game.

In the past I tried to solve that by having players declare 3-5 turns' worth of
actions in advance and resolving those on my side, but that ended up being a lot
of work and after a while I burned out on it.

It was at about this time that I first read Lancer, and noticed it used an
interesting initiative system. One of the PCs always acts first in a turn,
followed by an enemy. We alternate that way until all people on one side have
acted, and then the remaining combatants on the other side act one after the
other. The players themselves decide who acts during each "player activation",
and the GM decides who acts during each enemy activation. The order in which
characters act can therefore vary from turn to turn, but the order of
_activations_ always remains the same.

I'd later find out this model was known as "Popcorn Initiative". It worked well
for me in the couple of sessions of real-time Lancer I ran, and I'd get a lot
more experience with it when I joined a forum game of Zeitgeist using D&D 4th
Edition rules.

Popcorn Initiative works extremely well in that game. Post flow during combat is
pretty much uninterrupted as long as there's anyone available to post. We get
through a whole combat round in a single day if everyone is on point, a
formidable pace for an asynchronous game.

It worked so well, it made me think I'd only run an async GURPS game if I could
use popcorn initiative in it. And it turns out adding popcorn initiative to
GURPS is not hard at all!

## The Rule

Instead of using Basic Speed values to determine turn order, use the system
described at the start of this post, and repeated here for ease of reference:

- A PC always goes first, followed by an enemy.

- The two sides then alternate taking their turns until all members of one side
  have finished.

- The remaining combatants then take their turns one after the other.

- Repeat the above procedure for each 1-second round in the combat.

- Players decide which PC acts on each player turn. The GM decides who acts on
  each enemy turn. The order doesn't have to remain constant from second to
  second.

Traits and maneuvers that give extra actions or extra attacks all affect the
character's _own_ turn, as normal. A character's defenses "reset" at the start
of their turn as usual. Surprise still works the same, and limits your actions
in the same way. All this rule change is how to determine the order in which
turns happen in a 1-second round.

If the battle involves one or more characters with Enhanced Time Sense, then
all of them get to go before the less enhanced combatants, using the rules above
among themselves. It effectively splits the second into two "sub-rounds".

Having a high Speed here is still useful because it gives you more Dodge and
more Move. Changes to Basic Speed cost the same as under the standard rules.

## Popcorn Examples

**Example 1**: A party of four fantasy adventurers fights a group of 6 orcs. The
heavily armored warrior PC goes first and positions himself to protect his
squishier buddies. An orc goes next, then a PC, and so on until all PCs have
acted. The final two orcs act one after the other.

**Example 2**: Two of the orcs in the battle above attack the warrior, who
blocks once and parries once. This leaves him with penalties for further
defenses. If he is not the first to act next round, the penalties will stay with
him until he does take his turn.

**Example 3**: The same four adventurers meet a Giant Enemy Crab who has Extra
Attack 1. Again one of the PCs goes first. The crab goes next, and he can make 2
attacks during his turn as in the normal rules. Then the remaining PCs act.

**Example 4**: A group of 6 WW2 British Commandos ambushes a patrol squad of 8
Nazi soldiers. The Nazis are surprised and are considered Mentally Stunned as
per the standard rules. Though the GM gets to choose the order in which the
enemy soldiers act, all they can do on their turns is attempt to recover from
the stun.

**Example 5**: A 6-person squad of the Solar Patrol runs into a pack of three
homicidal robots while exploring a ghost spaceship! All of the robots have
Enhanced Time Sense, and so does one of the PCs who is a robot themselves. So
the PC robot acts first, then the three enemy robots, and then the rest of the
PCs.

## Conclusion

This is definitely a system I want to try out when I next GM an async GURPS
game. I tried to change the standard rules as little as possible. Lancer does a
few more things, like giving certain powerful enemies multiple activations per
round, but I want to experiment with this base version before I try doing that
in GURPS.
