---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Lizardfolk"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-lizardfolk.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

We already looked at [lizardfolk][2] during our reading of the first Monster
Manual and the Monster Vault. As we saw before, there are several different
ethnicities of lizardfolk. The first MM had the human-sized "greenscales" and
the larger "blackscales". The Vault also contained a "poisonscale" type, which
turns out to have debuted here in the MM2.

Poisonscale lizardfolk have a smaller and slighter build than greenscales,
though they're still Medium. To make up for their lack of brute strength, they
developed a kind of internal alchemy: by eating certain specific plants, they
can sweat poison. They usually apply this poison to their weapons, but some
poisonscales like to apply it directly to their enemies by wrestling with them.

The lore in this entry is more focused on the individual stat blocks than on
overall lizardfolk culture, so presumably everything that was said in the first
Monster Manual still applies here. The stat blocks themselves are different
enough from what we got in the MV to be worth discussing.

All lizardfolk in this entry are Medium Natural Humanoids with the Swamp Walk
ability, allowing them to ignore swampy difficult terrain. They also usually do
something poison-related, though the specifics vary per stat block.

## Poisonscale Magus

These spellcasters specialize in toxic magic. They occupy positions as honored
advisers in poisonscale communities, but this power and respect comes at a
cost. Their own magic poisons them, and shortens their lives.

Magi are Level 2 Artillery with 32 HP and speed 6, carrying **daggers** into
battle for use as implements and in emergencies. All of their spells target
Fortitude, so they're a threat to your squishies.

In a fight a magus is likely to open up with a **Poison Barrage** (encounter) an
area burst attack that deals poison damage and inflicts Vulnerable 5 Poison on
thise it hits (save ends). A miss does half damage and inflicts the
vulnerability for a turn.

Then they'll target individual vulnerable enemies with **Poison Blood**, a
ranged spell that deals immediate and ongoing poison damage (save ends). As a
minor action it can also use **Corrupt Poison**, a ranged spell that slides
someone suffering from ongoing poison damage 3 squares and slows them (save
ends).

There are enough interesting interactions here that the magus works more like a
fragile Controller than as Artillery.

## Poisonscale Slitherer

This represents your typical poisonscale warrior. Their slight build makes them
a bit cowardly, but they have good teamwork and their somewhat oversized tails
make them very stable.

Slitherers are Level 2 Soldiers with 36 HP and speed 5. They carry **spears**
for melee combat, and **javelins** for fighting at range. They prefer that last
one because it's safer, and because their javelins are poisoned! This manifests
as a secondary attack against Fortitude, which does about double the damage of
the initial hit.

Their ironically named **slitherer bravery** trait gives them a +2 attack bonus
when adjacent to at least one ally, and **slitherer stability** makes them
immune to knockdowns and forced movement. That's surprisingly powerful for a
level 2 soldier, and makes them an excellent wizard counter-measure.

## Poisonscale Savage

This warrior doesn't bother with fiddly stuff like poisoning weapons or personal
hygiene. It slaps enemies with its tail to cover them in poisoned sweat, and
them clubs them to death while they're weakened.

The savage is a Level 2 Brute with 45 HP and speed 6. It will probably start the
fight with the single **javelin** it carries, which damages and inflicts ongoing
poison damage because it's all sweaty. After that it attacks with a
**greatclub**, and can slap with its **tail** as a minor action. The tail does
no damage, but inflicts ongoing 5 poison damage on a hit (save ends).

## Poisonscale Collector

Collectors are responsible for gathering the special plants that allow
poisonscales to produce their poison. This means they're also trained
herbalists and alchemists. They're Level 3 Lurkers with 36 HP and speed 6.

Collectors are armed with **Daggers**, which do physical and ongoing poison
damage. Once an enemy is taking ongoing poison damage from this or any other
source, the collector can do several unpleasant things to them.

First of all, the **Poison Strike** passive trait gives them a +2 damage bonus
against poisoned targets. **Blinding Poison** is a spell that targets a poisoned
creature's Fortitude, dealing damage and blinding them on a hit (save ends). And
**End Strike** is a stab that targets someone who can't see the collector and
does a bunch of physical damage.

So this is one of those lurkers who can do something harmful to the PCs every
turn, though it takes a bit longer to activate its ultimate attack. That process
can be sped up if it has additional buddies who can inflict ongoing poison
damage.

## Poisonscale Myrmidon

A veteran warrior, fighting in a more disciplined manner with a club and a
shield. It's a Level 3 Soldier with 47 HP and speed 6. Its only attack is a
**club** that damages and marks on a hit, but it also has the collector's
**Poison Strike** trait.

Myrmidons can't poison enemies themselves, so they rely on the support of other
allies who can. They're good to pad the ranks of an all-poisonscale force,
though you're probably better off using lizardfolk from the other books if you
have a mixed force or want more interesting mechanics.

## Final Impressions

The poison theming here is interesting, and several of these stat blocks don't
get repeated in the Vault, so it's worth it to update them. As long as you avoid
the extra-xenophobic lore in the Vault, its stat blocks are good.

[2]:  {{ "/2020/06/23/lizardfolk.html" | relative_url }}
