---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Goliath"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I think Goliaths first appeared in the Races of Stone supplement for 3.5. In
Fourth Edition, their first appearance was as a playable option in the
PHB 2. They get their corresponding "monster" entry here, with a couple of stat
blocks suitable for use as opposition or NPC allies.

They're one of the many playable peoples designed to give players a "taste" of
being a cool fantasy monster without being unbalanced. Eladrin arguably do it
for Sidhe; dragonborn do it for dragons; tieflings for fiends; deva for
angels. Goliaths do it for giants.

## The Lore

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-goliath.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The typical goliath is stated to be between 7 and 8 feet tall, so whether
they're on the large side of Medium or the small side of Large is a matter of
opinion. The book's opinion is that they're Medium, since that allows them to be
playable. Their skin is gray or brown, and speckled with coin-sized bony growths
that look like rocks.

Goliaths have existed since shortly after the Primordials created the world,
which might mean they're a kind of byproduct of the creation of the Giants in
the same way the origin of the Dragonborn is tied to that of dragons. Goliaths
don't care enough about that to make myths about it, though.

All throughout their history they've preferred to keep to a nomadic existence in
the more mountainous areas of the world, so there isn't much about them in other
people's records either. While it's fairly common for individual goliaths to
travel the "lowlands" as adventurers or explorers, they haven't engaged in any
grand diplomacy or empire-building as a people.

Culturally, goliaths place a lot of value in individual skill and prowess, and
this makes them very competitive. Their communities probably have all sorts of
tournaments and contests in their calendars. Individual goliaths tend to turn
everything into a contest, even if only in the privacy of their own minds - they
keep score and constantly compare themselves both to their companions and to
their own past performance. That battle where Legolas and Gimli compare their
kill counts? That's every fight where a goliath is involved. This does have the
downside of making them get a bit depressive when they fail to measure up to
their own standards.

I suspect Kord is a very popular deity among goliaths, and they also often
worship the primal spirits.

## The Numbers

As far as the rules are concerned, Goliaths are Medium Natural Humanoids. They
have a natural speed of 6, and human-equivalent senses. Their signature ability
is **Stone's Endurance**, a minor-action encounter power which gives them
some resistance to all damage for a turn. The value of this resistance is 5/tier
(5 at heroic, 10 at paragon, 15 at epic).

### Goliath Sunspeaker

This is more of a primal priest of the sun spirits than a cleric of Pelor,
focused on burning people with sun-powered lasers. Sunspeakers are Level 7
Artillery with 64 HP, wearing light armor and using an orb as an implement.

Their melee basic attack is the **Sunspeaker's Hand**, which targets Reflex and
deals light radiant damage. **Solar Sphere** does the same at Range 20 with
better damage.

Less often, the sunspeaker can use **Solar Rays** (recharge 4+) against up to 2
targets within Range 10. This deals light radiant _or_ fire damage, as well as
ongoing damage of the type chosen (save ends). This allows them to potentially
stack two sources of ongoing damage on someone with the same power.

If cornered, the sunspeaker can use **Flaring Leap** (move action; encounter) to
jump 3 squares and then move its remaining speed. This jet-powered jump causes a
fire in the sunspeaker's starting space, which deals damage to adjacent enemies
or to those foolish enough to enter the flaming square. The fire lasts for a
turn and can be sustained with minor actions.

Finally, it can use a big area attack named **Call Down The Sun** once per
encounter, which is a bit weaker than Solar Sphere but targets a lot of people
and does half damage on a miss.

### Goliath Guardian

A more straightforward but no less powerful martial type. The guardian is a
Level 9 Soldier with 96 HP. It's heavily armored by still has speed 6, wielding
a bastard sword and a light shield.

Its basic **sword** attack marks for a turn, and if the target is prone it's
also prevented from getting up for the same amount of time. The guardian knocks
people prone with **Ram's Charge** (recharge 5+), a maneuver that deals light
physical damage and has a long list of riders: it pushes the target 2 squares,
knocks it prone, and allows the goliath to make a free sword attack against the
target. As the name says, it can be used as part of a charge.

Finally, **Warrior's Leap** is a passive that allows the guardian to jump
without provoking opportunity attacks. It still uses the standard jump rules
(and it's high Athletics score) for that.

Guardians are awesome in moutainous terrain that's full of cliffs. Even if their
targets aren't thrown overboard, they'll still stay on the ground for quite a
while, granting advantage to the guardian and any sneak-attacking skirmisher
buddies.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Goliaths often team up with similarly-inclined mountain-dwellers, which can
include dwarves, galeb duhrs, or goblins. I suppose that might include stone
giants as well, if you level your goliaths up a bit. The sample encounter is
level 9, and includes a galeb duhr rock-caller, 3 goliath guardians, and 1
sunspeaker.

I like goliaths, they fill a very specific "huge person" niche. These two stat
blocks are interesting from a mechanics standpoint as well.
