---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Darkmantle"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-darkmantle.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Darkmantles feel like a very AD&D kind of monster, but I can't find mention of
them in the Monster Manuals for those editions. Either they appeared in a
supplement, or they're actually introduced in 3.x.

## The Lore

The darkmantle is a creature native to the Shadowfell, which predictably means
it likes hanging out in dark places such as caves and underground ruins. Being
both pointy and membranous, they hunt by hanging from the ceiling disguised as
stalactites and dropping on unsuspecting prey from above.

Darkmantles have animal intellect, and are about as smart as dogs. As such,
they're often tamed by shadow- and underground-themed humanoids to act as
guards and/or living traps.

## The Numbers

There's only one stat block here, so we'll get right to it.

### Darkmantle Enveloper

This is described as a Large Shadow Magical Beast, though I think it should be
labeled a Beast instead. Beasts "look and behave like animals", and magical
beasts "look like animals and behave like people". Well, the label is just
descriptive, so it makes no difference in the stats.

The Darkmantle Enveloper is a Level 8 Lurker with 76 HP. It has both Blindsight
8 from echolocation, and Darkvision. It emits a **Shadowy Field** aura (5) that
reduces bright light to dim light, which I guess it only activates once its
presence is known. It has ground and climb speeds of 2, and a fly speed of 6.

Its basic attack is a **Tentacle Lash** that does regular physical damage, but
the main event is **Engulf** (melee 1 vs. Reflex), which does the same damage
and grabs the target. The target is considered blinded until the grab ends, and
the creature can spend a minor action to sustain it and deal an automatic 5
damage to the target. Only one victim can be engulfed at once.

If the victim's buddies try to help them, the darkmantle can use a **Shadowcry**
(close burst 3 vs. Fortitude; minor action; encounter) to keep them at bay. This
does light thunder damage and dazes for a turn.

When someone manages to damage the darkmantle, it can react with a
**Shadowjump** (recharge 5-6), which allows it to teleport 6 squares to a space
in darkness or dim light. The creature arrives invisible and with its aura
turned off, both of which last for a turn.

One small mechanical issue: since Engulf is not a basic attack, it can't be used
as part of a charge. This could be interpreted to say that the darkmantle can't
drop from the ceiling and use Engulf, but that's clearly not the intention
here. I'd say the attack _can_ be used as part of a "drop charge".

## Sample Encounter and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is level 6, and feature a pair of darkmantles acting as
guards for a trio of duergar.

Eh... it's another underground ambusher that disguises itself as a rock
formation. The most a darkmantle has ever interested me is when it was part of a
joke about gygaxian deathtrap dungeons ("the stalactites are darkmantles; the
stalagmites ropers...").

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
