---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Treant"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-treant.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Treants are inspired by Tolkien's ents and have been in the game since at least
the days of BECMI, and likely earlier. Here, they are both in the Monster Manual
and in the Vault.

## The Lore

Treants are indeed very similar to the ents we see in The Lord of the Rings:
they're sapient tree-like creatures who live in primeval forests. The main
difference between them (especially in 4e) is that treants are a lot quicker to
arrive at decisions, and a lot angrier with trespassers.

Treants love the forests where they live, and acts as their guardians. They
spend much of their extremely long lives in a dormant/meditative state in which
they're pretty much indistinguishable from normal trees. In this state, they can
feel the general state of the surrounding forest and its creatures, and know
when it's in distress. When that happens, they rise to defend it.

Though treants love their forest and its creatures, they hold no particular
regard for any outsiders. They'll be friendly towards those who demonstrate the
proper respect for the wild, and violent towards anyone who has the temerity to
chop down trees or otherwise despoil their territory.

The Monster Vault goes a little further here, saying that treants view
civilization in much the same way "civilized" people view the untamed wild: a
source of danger best removed. Their prefer nature in its wildest and most
unspoiled state, and will work to protect their territories even from natural
disasters like floods or fires caused by lightning. They'll ally with anyone who
shares their values and opposes their enemies. They're also very easy to anger
(particularly when they feel they've been betrayed) and very hard to placate.

A treant's most frequent allies are dryads, who share their general
disposition. Eladrin and other fey are often allies as well, though in this case
both sides tend to view each other more warily. You could even have a treant
protecting the lair of an orc tribe, as long as the orcs focus their destruction
outside of the treant's domain.

## The Numbers

Treants are Huge Fey Magical Beasts with the Plant keyword. They have low-light
vision, Forest Walk, and a **Wooden Body** trait that makes them take ongoing 5
fire damage (save ends) whenever an attack deals immediate fire damage to
them. The trait only gets a name in the Monster Vault, but is also present in
the MM versions. If the attack in question already does ongoing fire damage, I
guess this trait doesn't stack with it.

Treants fight using a combination of their great strength with primal magic that
grants them a measure of control over their surroundings. They're fairly smart
at Int 14, and though grumpy and aggressive they're Unaligned.

### Bramblewood Treant (Monster Vault)

Unlike the other treants, this one is "only" Large. It could be a younger
specimen, or a different species that inhabits forests with smaller trees. It's
a Level 10 Soldier with 108 HP and all common treant traits. It has speed 8 and
a **Bramble Branches** aura (2) that turns the covered area into difficult
terrain.

The bramblewood treant attacks with Reach 2 **slams** that mark the target for a
turn, and can throw **stones** (Ranged 20 vs. AC) for some ranged damage. If an
enemy within 2 squares moves, the treant can use **Entangling Branches** (melee
2 vs. Reflex) as an interrupt and grab them with an escape DC of 18.

This treant is at the right level to pal around with most dryads, some of the
eladrin, or the banshrae.

### Treant (Both)

The basic model is Huge, and a Level 16 Elite Controller with 316 HP and all
common traits. Its land speed is 8, and it projects a **Grasping Roots** aura
(3) that makes the covered area difficult terrain for nonflying enemies.

It fights with powerful **slams**, and can use an **Earthshaking Stomp** (close
burst 2 vs. Fortitude) to do a bunch of damage and knock enemies prone. In the
Monster Manual this is an encounter power, and in the Monster Vault it recharges
if the attack misses every target.

The treant's other trick is **Awaken Forest** (area burst 3 within 10 vs. AC),
which causes the vegetation in the area (trees included) to animate and attack
enemies within. In the MM this is an encounter power that creates a zone which
can be sustained with minor actions, and which makes new attacks against enemies
inside whenever the treant sustains it.

In the MV, it's a simple at-will standard action attack, and it creates a zone
of difficult terrain that lasts either until the end of the encounter, or until
the treant uses this power again.

The Monster Vault version of the treant is by far the better one, since it has
updated damage values and is also a better controller. Other than "use fire",
there isn't much you can do to get the upper hand over it, since it can make
solid attacks and impair movement both in melee and at range. Treants pair
really well with other creatures that have the Forest Walk ability.

### Treant Grove Guardian (Monster Vault)

I guess this is the sort of creature you can find guarding a powerful druid's
home base. It's a Level 18 Brute with 212 HP and all common treant traits. Its
speed is 8.

Grove guardians are all about physical combat. Their basic attack is a Reach 3
**Sweeping Slam** that can target one or two creatures, damaging and knocking
them prone on a hit. Once per encounter they can perform a maneuver called
**Stump Stomp**, in which they move their speed, can enter other creature's
spaces, and make a sweeping slam attack against each creature whose space they
enter.

### Blackroot Treant (Both)

This is an _undead_ treant. You know those haunted forests where the trees seem
to have evil faces? These guys are those trees. Unlike living treants they're
actively Evil, and actually a bit smarter at Int 16.

Blackroot treants are Huge Level 19 Elite Soldiers with 368 HP and all common
treant traits. They have Speed 6 and the Undead keyword in addition to being
Plants. They project a **Killing Roots** aura (2) which does 10 necrotic damage
to enemies caught inside.

Their Reach 3 **slams** also do ongoing necrotic damage (save ends), and mark the target
for a turn. They have **Double Attack**, and so can use two of those per
action. As a minor action they can use **Entangling Roots** (melee 4 vs. Reflex)
to knock someone prone and restrain them.

The Monster Manual version is a less powerful, since it lacks Double Attack, its
slams don't mark, and the effect of Entangling Roots ceases if the treant gets
more than 4 squares away from the target. Always use the MV version if
possible. Used well, they can keep most of the party locked down tight, since
they can use Entangling Roots 1-3 times per turn and have no limit to the number
of people they can keep restrained.

### Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The MM sample encounter is level 19 and all about that haunted forest vibe: 1
blackroot treant, 2 slaughter wights, and 2 sword wraiths.

I like treants, even though this iteration of them is a bit more aggressive than
I would like. Mechanically speaking, the MV versions are clearly superior to the
MM originals, and you should use them whenever possible.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
