---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Goblin"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-goblin.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

D&D Fourth Edition uses "Goblins" to describe a set of closely related species
of humanoids: actual goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears. They're a very
traditional component of the game and we looked at lots of them in the
MM1/Monster Vault Let's Read. The post covering their basic lore is [here][2].

Since the first Manual covered them so well, the second brings us a small number
of more specialized stat blocks for them.

## Bugbear Wardancer

Wardancers are specialized martial artists. Their weapon of choice is a
two-handed heavy flail, which they swing in wide arcs while moving through enemy
forces in the battlefield. The end result looks something like a dance, thus the
name. There's a religious element to the art: there are different schools
organized around the worship of different exarchs of Bane, who compete among
each other to see whose war dance is the best.

The wardancer presented here is a Level 6 Skirmisher with 70 HP, low-light
vision, and Speed 7. Its basic attack is a **Flail Dance** that does physical
damage and has a lot of stacked riders: it pushes the target 2 square and knocks
it prone, and also allows the bugbear to shift 1 square. Yes, this is an at-will
basic attack.

The wardancer also has a couple of special attacks. **Flail Barrier** (recharge
5+) does a bit of automatic damage in a burst 2 around the bugbear, and makes it
take half damage from weapon attacks until the end of its next turn. **Flail
Assault** (close burst 2 vs Reflex; encounter) does a bit more damage and knocks
those it hits prone.

All the wardancer's attacks deal extra damage if it has combat advantage against
the target.

## Goblin Acolyte of Maglubyet

Another martial artist, this one a goblin from a sect devoted to Maglubyet. In
previous editions (and again on 5th), Maglubyet is the main goblinoid deity, but
here he's one of Bane's Exarchs. His acolytes seek to make themselves in his
image.

The Acolyte is a Level 1 Controller with 29 HP, Speed 6, and low-light
vision. They wield a battleaxe in combat, and back it up with a bit of divine
magic.

Acolytes are surrounded by a **Life Scourge** aura (2) that prevents enemies
inside from recovering hit points. Their basic attack is a **Slashing Shroud**
that consists of an axe strike that also makes the acolyte invisible to the
target until the end if the acolyte's next turn. A good option against PC
defenders.

They can attack at range with the **Hand of Maglubyet** (ranged 10
vs. Fortitude), a telekinetic attack that deals force damage and either slides
the target 3 squares or immobilizes it for a turn. **Maglubyet's Fists**
(recharge 5+) allows them to use this attack twice in a single action. So as far
as martial artists go, this is one of those annoying hadouken spammers.

The acolyte also has the standard **Goblin Tactics** power that allows it to
shift 1 square as a reaction when missed by a melee attack. This is what you
would change if you were making acolytes of other species.

## Lolthbound Goblin

Goblins are generally big on Bane worship, but that's not universal among
them. This is a goblin whose people have been slaves to the drow for
generations. Their training, and even their physiology, have some important
differences from your usual goblins. They're clearly meant to be encountered
alongside drow, though for that to work out you'll need to make those drow lower
level or the goblin higher level.

As written, the Lolthbound Goblin is a Level 3 Soldier with 45 HP. They have
speed 6, and replace the usual low-light vision with full darkvision. They wear
light armor and fight with a war pick.

When Lolthbound Goblins are within 5 squares of a drow, they gain a +2 bonus to
all their attacks and defenses. That **pick** is a high-crit weapon and marks
targets for a turn on a hit. Once per encounter they can use a **Stinging Blow**
that deals poison damage and instead of marking increases any ongoing poison
damage the target is taking by 5. This synergizes with the poisoned weapons drow
so often carry.

Also once per encounter they can use a **Lolthbound Shriek** (close blast 5
vs. Fortitude), which deals light thunder damage to anyone in the area who is
not a drow or spider.

Aside from the usual Goblin Tactics reaction, they also have **Drow Protector**,
an interrupt where the goblin throws himself in front of a drow that's just been
targetted by an attack, becoming the target instead.

## Lolthbound Goblin Slave

This is a Level 12 Minion Skirmisher version of the lolthbound goblin above,
which makes it appropriate for use with drow without the need for level
adjustments. They're also armed with war picks, and add a hand crossbow to their
loadout.

Their basic melee attack is a **Stinging Pick**, which works just like the
Stinging Blow from the regular version. Their basic **crossbow** attack deals a
bit more damage if they've moved 3 or more squares before making it.

They also gain the attack and defense bonus from being near drow, and have
Goblin Tactics.

## Hobgoblin Fleshcarver

This is the hobgoblin specialized martial artist. Unlike the bugbear and goblin
examples, fleshcarvers don't seem to have a religious component to their
training. It's all about hard work and crafting your own custom-fitted
weapons. Their weapons of choice are a polearm and a set of poisoned throwing
darts, whose poison is harvested from serpents they hunt as part of their
training. Fleshcarvers never refuse a challenge to combat, though they're smart
enough to not let such a challenge distract them in the middle of an ongoing
battle.

Fleshcarvers are Level 6 Elite Controllers with 146 HP. They have Speed 6 and
low-light vision, wear heavy armor, and are armed with the afore-mentioned
specialized weapons.

Their stance and movements act as an aura (2) named **Fleshcarver's Trap**,
dealing 5 damage to any enemy inside the first time they move during their
turn. Their **glaive** is reach 2 and is used both for basic attacks and for an
at-will **Glaive Flurry** that targets all enemies in a close burst 2, does more
damage than the basic attack, and slides targets 2 squares.

At range they can throw those **Toxic Darts** to do a bit of poison damage and
slow the target (save ends). If the target was already slowed, it's immobilized
instead. When they're hit by a melee attack, they can use their reaction to
shift 2 squares and make a dart attack. And finally, fleshcarvers have the same
Hobgoblin Resilience and Phalanx Soldier powers from MM1 hobgoblins.

These hobgoblins are more effective when lots of enemies are in reach, but the
selective targetting on their area attack means they engage all those enemies
while fighting in formation for that sweet defense bonus from Phanlanx Soldier.

## Sample Encounters

These new goblinoid specialists can be inserted into any goblin encounter, and
being goblins themselves also work well with any of their typically allied
creatures. These are the encounters we get on the book:

- Level 1: 1 goblin acolyte, 3 goblin warriors, 1 Lolthbound Goblin. It's likely
  the whole group are drow slaves, with the LBG being their leader. The level
  math works out, but the LBG's drow-related skills are wasted here.

- Level 6: 2 bugbear wardancers, 2 bugbear warriors, 1 barghest battle lord. A
  warlord and their bodyguards.

- Level 6: 1 fleshcarver, 3 hobgoblin soldiers, 2 dire wolves. A patrol with a
  little extra kick to it.

- Level 13: 4 lolthbound goblin slaves, 1 drow priest, 2 blade spiders, 2 drow
  warriors. Lots of poison being thrown around on this one, which makes the
  minions more dangerous than their level would indicate.

## Final Impressions

I like these new additions, because their stat blocks are interesting and their
associated lore fleshes goblin culture out a bit more. I like that they're
complex enough to have multiple martial styles.


[2]: {{ "/2020/04/22/goblinoids.md" | relative_url }}
