---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Behir"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-behir.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Behirs first appear in AD&D 1st Edition, and are one of the game's many
"not-quite-dragon" monsters.

## The Lore

Behirs are giant reptilian creatures with serpentine bodies, many legs (8 or 12,
depending on edition), and innate electrical powers. They're sapient but
anti-social and uninterested in the trappings of civilization. They don't even
tolerate each other's presence for longer than absolutely necessary. A behir
mother will eject her young from the lair shortly after they're born, forcing
them to fend for themselves.

Though a behir makes lairs in pretty much the same places you'd expect to find
dragons, it accumulates neither treasure nor servants. All it wants is to hunt
and be left alone. Like a lot of D&D super-predators it doesn't usually care
about the sapience of its victims, but it _can_ be reasoned with or bribed if
you can get it to listen to you. Behirs can communicate both in Common and
Draconic.

This means that some people try to recruit behirs into service. Though this can
end badly if the behir's terms are not met, a successful negotiation will allow
the foolhardy employer to obtain the services of a formidable monster.

### The Numbers

Behirs are Huge Natural Magical Beasts, and have Tremorsense 10 and Resist
Lightning 15. They fight with a combination of natural weapons and lightning
attacks, which vary per stat block. They're Unaligned, and have a typical Int
score of 7.

### Behir

This represents the typical specimen found in the wild. It's a Level 14 Solo
Soldier with 564 HP. Their ground speed is 7, and they have a climb speed
of 5. In combat they project a **Lightning Storm** aura (5) that causes 5
lightning damage to anyone caught inside.

The behir fights with its **claws** and **bite**, both of which are Reach 3 and
do the same damage. The claw is a basic attack, and the bite does a mix of
physical and lightning damage.

It can also **Devour** a Medium or smaller victim (Reach 3 vs AC), doing bite
damage and swallowing it whole. This counts as a grab! While it lasts the victim
only has line of sight and effect to the behir, and no one else has line of
sight or effect to the victim. A creature can escape the grab by the usual
means, appearing adjacent to he behir, and can also automatically crawl out of a
dead behir as a move action. With a minor action, the behir can sustain the grab
and deal an automatic 15 damage to the victim. Only one victim at a time fits in
its gizzard.

The monster can also use a **Lightning Breath** (close blast 5 vs. Reflex;
recharge 5-6), which does "high" lightning damage and dazes (save ends), and
does half damage on a miss.  Its **Thunderleg Stomp** (close burst 3
vs. Fortitude) does "low" physical damage and knocks targets prone on a hit.


The damage on all of these is too low due to the math bugs: the basic attacks do
an average of 15 damage when they should be doing 22. The tactics section says
behirs begin by swallowing a squishy even if they have to eat a few opportunity
attacks to do it, and then favoring their area attacks unless sorely pressed by
a single character. With a damage upgrade across the board, these tactics are
quite sound, since the Stomp becomes a more viable option.

Being solo monsters, behirs have a neat initiative trick: they don't roll
initiative at all! Instead, **Lightning Reflexes** gives them three turns per
combat round at initiative counts 30, 20, and 10. This means that the poor
swallowed victim might be looking at 45 automatic damage per round if they fail
to escape the grab on their own turn. Using that first action on Swallow is
definitely a worthy investiment.

### Behir Bolter Whelp

A young specimen, not yet fully grown. It's merely Large, and a Level 8 Solo
Soldier with 352 HP and Resist 10 Lightning. It's standard damage is 12, and it
should be around 16 with the update. It has a ground speed of 8 and a climb
speed of 5.

The bolter is going to start the fight by targetting a squishy **Knockdown
Rush** (Reach 2 vs. AC; minor action; recharge 4-6), which allows it to charge
and knock the target prone on a hit. Then, since this was a minor action, it's
going to follow that up with a **claw** or **bite**, which work the same as the
adult's with smaller numbers and Reach 2.

When the PCs inevitably surround it, the bolder will emit a **Lightning Shock**
pulse (close burst 2 vs. Reflex; recharge 5-6 and when first bloodied) which
does "high" lightning damage, half on a miss. When hit by a melee attack, it can
respond with a claw as a reaction (**Rip-Claw Response**).

Despite being young, the bolter already displays **Lightning Reflexes**, acting
on initiative counts 20, 15, and 5, so with enough luck on those recharge rolls
it can keep bouncing between PCs for a while.

### Behir Stormsteed

This "domesticated" behir was recruited and trained as a mount by storm
giants. It's a Level 24 Soldier with 229 HP. It has Resisnt Lightning 15, a
ground speed of 8, and replaces the usual climb speed with a Fly speed of 8
(hover). This is explained as the creature having the ability to walk on the
lightning it generates.

The math bug affects the stormsteed particularly hard since it's an epic
creature. Its standard damage is a woeful 18, and it should be 32!

Its basic attack is a **bite** that does a mix of physical and lightning damage,
and it can also use its **Lightning Breath** (close burst 3 vs. Reflex, recharge
4-6) to deal lightning damage all around itself. I wonder if that was meant to
be a blast.

When mounted, the stormsteed can use **Ride The Lightning**, which grants the
rider a +2 to attack with lightning powers, and allows the steed itself to use
Lightning Breath once per turn as a minor action indepentently of the recharge
counter. Perfect for storm giants or someone like a bluespawn godslayer.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We get two sample encounters: a level 8 one with a bolter whelp and three
bugbear wardancers, and a level 14 one with an adult, a medusa, and a yuan-ti
incanter. If something even remotely looks like a snake, Zehir has an interest
in it.

Behirs are one of those monsters I never really got into in previous edition. A
closer reading of this MM2 entry does give me a few ideas of how to use them,
but I still can't say I'm pumped about them.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
