---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Dragon, Adamantine"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-dragon-adamantine.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Adamantine dragons are the first metallics we'll cover. I finally found a wiki
with publication histories for monsters, so I can say that that they first
appeared in a Monstrous Compendium for AD&D 2nd Edition, and in a Dragon article
for 3.x. This means they had a minor presence in the game until their first
proper Monster Manual appearance here.

## The Lore

Adamantine dragons like to lair in huge underground caverns, and can be found in
any sort of climate. They consider everyone else living in their claimed
territory to be their subjects, from whom they demand loyalty, respect, and
tribute. The flip-side of this is that adamantine dragons feel a genuine sense
of _noblesse oblige_ towards these subjects, and will protect them with all
their might.

Their claws and fangs are made of their titular metal, so their attacks slice
through armor as if it wasn't there. Their roars are powerful, and their breath
weapon is a focused sonic attack. In combat, they're cool-headed and
tactical. If alone, they try to isolate weaker foes and focus fire on them. If
accompanied by allies, they'll charge to the front line and attract the brunt of
enemy attacks to allow their allies more opportunities to damage the
opposition.

## The Numbers

As usual, we get stat blocks representing four age categories: Young, Adult,
Elder, and Ancient. All are Natural Magical Beasts with the Dragon keyword. All
stat blocks are Unaligned.

Adamantine dragons start at size Large, growing to Huge at Elder and Gargantuan
at Ancient. They have trained Perception, Darkvision, and Thunder Resistance
that starts at 15 and goes up by 5 on each subsequent age category. Their ground
speed starts at 6 and rises to 8 on Adult and older. Their flight speed starts
at 8 and rises to 10 on Adult and 12 on Ancient. They also have Overland
Flight 15, which is the speed you use when calculating how much distance they
cover over extended times.

### Young Adamantine Dragon

This is a Level 7 Solo Soldier with 332 HP and the traits described above. Its
basic attacks are a **bite** and a **claw**, both of which target Reflex instead
of AC because they're adamantine. The bite is a little stronger, **Double
Attack** allows the dragon to claw twice in a single action.

Their **Breath Weapon** (close blast 5 vs. Fortitude; recharge 5-6) does thunder
damage and knocks the targets prone on a hit. It replaces the usual "half damage
on a miss" with a much more interesting Effect: at the start of the dragon's
next turn, it gives a thunderous roar that deals automatic thunder damage to
everyone in a close burst 3.

**Bloodied Breath** and **Frightful Presence** are here, and they work as
outlined in the intro.

**Wing Buffet** (melee 2 vs. Fortitude) is a reaction that triggers when an
enemy enters or leaves an adjacent square. On a hit it deals light physical
damage and knocks prone. This is better than a standard opportunity attack
because it also triggers on a shift or other forms or movement.

### Adult Adamantine Dragon

Adults are Level 14 Solo Soldiers with 564 HP. Their numbers are of course all
larger, but they are almost identical to young dragons in what they can do.

There have been a few additions: the bite now also inflicts ongoing damage (save
ends), and Double Attack is replaced by **Draconic Fury**, which allows them to
make three claw attacks _and_ bite a different target in a single action.

### Elder Adamantine Dragon

Elders are Level 21 Solo Soldiers with 796 HP. They have everything adults have,
with a few additions:

Their **Draconic Fury** gains another claw attack, for a total of four claws and
a bite. They also gain a new attack named **Painful Resonance** (Ranged 20
vs. Fortitude; minor action; recharge 6) that inflicts ongoing thunder damage
and dazes (save ends). Since this is a minor action, it can be used in the same
turn as Draconic Fury.

### Ancient Adamantine Dragon

Ancients are Level 28 Solo Soldiers with 1020 HP. This puts makes them a match
for a pair of primordial colossi. They have everything elders have, plus their
melee reach increases to 4 and the area of their Breath Weapon's follow-up roar
increases to 5.

They also gain a new trait named **Bloodied Resilience**, which gives them
Resist 10 to all damage while they are bloodied.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The book doesn't even pretend you're going to fight these solos by themselves,
though that of course is an option depending on what you want. Since adamantine
dragons place themselves in the front line, they favor allies who can benefit
from the distraction to rain ranged damage or control upon the enemy, or give
the PCs the run-around and hit their squishies. And they're going to think of
party composition in these terms, since they're tacticians.

The sample encounter is level 15, an adult adamantine dragon and 2 banshrae
warriors.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
