---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Ankheg"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-ankheg.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Ankhegs appear in AD&D 1st Edition, and they would go on to achieve minor fame
among players because of their lore.

## The Lore

Ankhegs are giant burrowing insects who dig mazelike tunnel networks and hunt by
bursting through the ground and snatching surface prey with their huge
mandibles. They also have acidic saliva, which they can spray at enemies.

These creatures live in "family units" consisting of a mated pair and a small
brood of young. These broodlings are rarely seen on the surface - their parents
bring prey to them underground. Other things might also be living in ankheg
tunnels, since the creatures don't use all of it as living space.

This is the extent of the lore we get in the MM2, but it was the bits left out
that made ankhegs low-key famous. These bits say that ankhegs prefer to dig
through soil rich in minerals and organic matter. This means forests, but it
also means _good farmland_. Therefore, these creatures are likely to be found
very close to civilized settlements. I think I saw at least one source that said
having ankhegs underground actually improved the quality of the soil. If this
isn't true in your campaign, it might very well be a common folk superstition.

Even if ankhegs don't enrich the soil, their presence might still act as an
extra security measure against the many _other_ dangers from the wild, assuming
the farmers in question can develop some way of avoiding the beasts
themselves. If you walk without rythm, you won't attract the
worm. Unfortunately, it looks like they cannot be tamed, so farming in ankheg
country makes for a very interesting life. Fortunately, you won't find more than
one "family" of ankhegs in a given area.

## The Numbers

Ankhegs are Natural Beasts, with the adults being Large and the broodlings
Small. Both have tremorsense and a burrow speed, and are of animal intelligence.

### Ankheg

This adult specimen is a Level 3 Elite Lurker with 100 HP. It has Resist 5 Acid
to protect itself from its own saliva, a land speed of 8, and a burrowing speed
of 4 with the Tunneling keyword, which means it leaves stable tunnels behind.

The classic ankheg tactic is for the beast to use its Stealth training and
burrowing speed to lie in wait underground until it senses prey passing
above. Then it's going to erupt and hit its victims with an **Acid Spray**
(close burst 3 vs. Reflex) which deals immediate and ongoing acid damage and
also slows (save ends both). It can do that again it if's bloodied.

Next it's going to nab the nearest victim using a **Mandible Grab**, which
damages and grabs (Acrobatics DC 16 or Athletics DC 14 to escape). It can only
grab one victim at once, but **Mandible Carry** allows it to move normally with
a grabbed victim. If the victim struggles too much the ankheg can also **Gnaw
and Scuttle** as a minor action, which requires an attack roll and does physical
damage and ongoing acid damage (save ends) in addition to allowing the monster
to shift 2 squares.

The ankheg can put a lot of distance between itself and its victim's buddies in
a single turn by using a double move and spending a minor action on Gnaw and
Scuttle. Still, if someone does manage to reach it while it has a grabbed
victim, it can use **claw** attacks to fight in melee.

### Ankheg Broodling

Ankheg attacks are fun for the whole family, because you're going to be jumped
by Mom and Dad, who will then carry you a ways underground so the kids can come
out and eat.

Broodlings are Level 1 Minion Brutes, with the same tremorsense as the adults, a
land speed of 6 and a burrow speed of 2 with Tunneling. They have basic **claw**
attacks along with a less accurate and more damaging **Mandible Rip** that deals
some "splash" acid damage to enemies adjacent to the target on a
critical. **Brood Swarm** gives them a +4 bonus when attacking a creature
grabbed by any ankheg. This more than negates the accuracy penalty from Mandible
Rip.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is Level 4: a pair of ankhegs and 6 broodlings plus a rage
drake that was likely their original intended victim before the party came
along.

My initial impression of anhkegs was that they were just another big bug
monster, but the possibility of a setting where ankhegs under your farm fields
are just another fact of life makes the more interesting in my eyes. The section
on encounter groups also mentions that sometimes giant ants "take control" of a
group of broodlings after they drive their parents away, and I can almost hear
David Atenborough narrating that nature documentary.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
