---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Wyvern"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-wyvern.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Wyverns have been in the game since its beginnings (or at least since
BECMI). Here, they are present only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

Wyverns are the most famous "not-quite-dragons" of D&D, and the ones most likely
to be confused with real dragons from a distance. The most obvious visual
difference is that wyverns lack front legs.

There are others, too, which become more evident when you interact more closely
with them. Unlike dragons, wyverns are non-sapient animals, and they also lack
magical breath weapons. Instead, they have a stinger at the tip of their tails
that can inject prey with a potent venom. They're not as relentlessly voracious
as some of the other fantastic predators described in this book, but I imagine
they still might put a strain on any herds on their chosen territory.

In the wild, wyverns live in small groups called "flights", which roost in high
places like mountains and hunt the surrounding region together. If you see a
flight of wyverns up close, it's because they're trying to eat you.

Wyverns can be tamed, but the process has to start shortly after they're
born. As you might expect, there's a market for eggs and hatchlings, and sapient
opponents might bring their pet wyverns to the fight.

## The Numbers

We get stats for two species of wyverns here. Both are Large Beasts with the
Reptile keyword, and fight with their natural weapons: a bite, claws, and the
stinger. Wyverns are good fliers and much more agile in the air than on the
ground.

Note that wyvern damage as written is notoriously weak. Fixing this to use the
updated math should be a priority before you include them in an encounter.

### Wyvern

The more common variety is a Large Natural Beast with the Reptile and Mount
Keywords, and a Level 10 Skirmisher with 106 HP. Their land speed is 4, and
their flight speed is 8 with Hover.

Wyverns have two basic attacks: a **bite** with no special effects beyond
damage, and a slightly weaker attack with their **claws**, which can only be
done from the air and knocks prone on a hit. **Flyby Attack** allows them to fly
their speed and make one of these attacks at any point along the way without
drawing opportunity attacks.

They can also **sting**, of course, which does a little less damage than the
claw and triggers a secondary attack vs. Fortitude that deals ongoing poison
damage on a hit (save ends).

If used as a mount, the wyvern's **aerial agility** gives its rider +2 to all
defenses.

I'm guessing the wyvern doesn't bite very often. It's going to use flyby attacks
to knock people prone, or sting if that's not practical. Only a prone, poisoned
target will get the bite.

### Fell Wyvern

A larger species which originated in the Shadowfell but is also present in
places where that plane intersects with the world. It's a Large Shadow Beast and
a Level 24 Skirmisher with 228 HP. Despite not being undead, it has Resist 10
Necrotic and Vulnerable 5 Radiant. Its land speed is 6, and its fly speed is 12
with Hover.

Fell Wyverns fight mostly like wyverns with bigger numbers, and have all the
same attacks. Their venom causes "necrotic and poison" damage, so it's harder to
resist. They can also use a **pestilent breath** (close blast 5 vs. Fortitude;
recharge 5-6) that does immediate and ongoing necrotic damage.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

There's a single sample encounter: level 10, an ettin marauder, a basilisk, and
2 wyverns.

I also imagine either wyvern is a pretty close fit to those fell beasts the
Ringwraiths rode in Lord of the Rings, though their actual level would depend on
how high-powered you view that story as.

Given that wyverns can be mounts, the most clich√©d use for them would be to have
them as the "hostile humanoid" flying mount of choice, to have proper aerial
fights against human gryphon cavalry.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
