---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Spider"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Not only have monstrous spiders been in the game since the beginning, they've
been on every monster book we read so far. The MM3 is no exception in this
case.

## The Monsters

Looks like the Web Walk trait was a [Monster Vault][2] innovation. The spiders
in the MM3 don't have it, but it would make sense for them to do so. They do
already use fixed math, like the other monsters in this book.

All spiders here have a climb speed equal to their ground speed, with the Spider
Climb keyword to signal that they can also walk on ceilings. They also have
Tremorsense 5.

## Ambush Spider

Sometimes you have to go back to basics, and you can't get any more basic than
this. These Medium natural spiders behave much like mundane trapdoor spiders,
using webs to camouflage their hidey-holes and charging out of them to bite and
inject venom into their prey. As Level 2 Lurkers with 28 HP, they're likely the
first giant spider any group of adventures is going to face. I'm surprised
something like this only showed up in the MM3. Their speed is a breezy 8.

The spider's **Camouflage** trait allows it to hide when it has only partial
cover or concealment. Its basic attack is a **bite**, but it turns into a
**Venomous Bite** if made against a creature the spider is hidden from. This
does the same damage and can be used in a charge. It also slows the target and
inflicts 5 ongoing poison damage (save ends). This worsens to immobilized after
the first failed save.

## Spiderling

Spiderlings are immature giant spiders, merely Small in size. This is a generic
stat block that can be used to represent youngsters of any of the spider species
presented here or elsewhere. They're Level 4 Minion Skirmishers with Speed 6 and
a basic bite attack.

The attack deals only 2 poison damage, but it also gives poison vulnerability 5
to the target for a turn. If the target is already vulnerable to poison their
vulnerability increases by 2 instead. This means that multiple spiderling bites
on the same victim add up very fast, particularly if the adults join in at the
end. You can vary their level based on the expected level of the adult
specimens.

## Feyspitter Spider

This spider native to the Feywild produces a venom laced with psychedelic
fairy-tale qualities. Aside from the usual physiological damage, it also forces
its victims to dance uncontrolably! Over time, feyspitter hunting grounds come
to look like clearings where the vegetation has been stomped flat by all the
dancers.

Feyspitters are Medium Fey Beasts and Level 7 Controllers with 80 HP and a Speed
of 6. Their **bite** deals physical damage and inflicts 5 ongoing poison damage
(save ends). Each time the victim fails a save, the spider can slide them 3
squares.

They can also use **Poison Spittle** to spray their venom in a Close
Blast 3. This deams 10 ongoing poison damage on everyone it hits, with the same
sliding effect on each failed save. Finally, if hit in melee, feyspitters can
use a **Fey Leap** (recharge 5+) to teleport 3 squares as an interrupt. Yes,
this means they can jump out of melee range and negate any damage.

### Lolth's Reaver

Another epic level spider directly associated with Lolth. These spiders don't
exist in the wild. Instead, they're bred by Lolth's worshippers and fed the
blood of elves, eladrin and angels from an early age. Their upbringing makes
them sapient and Chaotic Evil. They commonly serve as mounts for Abyssal Drow,
and can also be found as pets and guardians in Lolth's mightiest temples
elsewhere in the universe.

Reavers are Large Elemental Beasts with the Mount and Spider keywords. They're
Level 25 Brutes with 287 HP. They have a ground speed of 8, but their Climb
speed is only 6. Their mount trait is **Web Saddle**, which prevents their rider
from being involuntarily dismounted by forced movement. I never even knew this
was a possibility for anyone else, so I find this very interesting. Enough PCs
have easy access to forced movement that staying mounted might very well be a
problem for an enemy rider in most situations. Not here, though.

Reavers fight with their extremely venomous **bites**, which deal light physical
damage and inflict 20 ongoing poison damage (save ends). They can shoot
**Grasping Threads** at range, which deal no damage but pull the target 5
squares and restrain them (save ends). Each failed saving throw causes the
reaver to pull the target an additional 5 squares. There is no hard limit on the
number of targets that can be restrained in this way.

Once per encounter the reaver can perform a **Web Leap**, jumping 8 squares
without provoking opportunity attacks and spreaying a Close Blast 3 with sticky
webs when they land. This does heavy physical damage, knocks its targets prone,
and prevents them from standing up (save ends).

### Spider Webs

This is not a monster, but a side box with example terrain features based on
spider webs. All of the spiders in this entry and most of the ones in previous
books are web-spinners, so these should see heavy usage in arachnid-themed
dungeons.

These hazards have variable DCs and attack rolls based on their level, which
should be similar to that of the overall encounter. The more badass the spider,
the more badass its webs.

**Web Sheets** are nearly invisible vertical webs, usually placed across
passages and corridors. Spotting them requires a Perception test against the
hard DC for their level. When someone enters their space, they attack the
victim's Reflex and immobilize them (save ends). A close or area fire attack
destroys the whole web, a melee fire attack destroys one square of it.

**Cobwebs** are thick and opaque sheets of webbing covering walls, floors, and
ceilings. Spiders use these for concealment, hiding behind them until it's time
to burst out and strike. They provide total concealment, and spiders can usually
perceive enemies through them using tremorsense. They might also count as
difficult terrain.

## Final Impressions

We're starting to repeat ourselves a bit with all these spiders, but it's nice
to see a low-level example. I also really liked the Feyspitter for its dancing
venom.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2021/01/05/spider.html" | relative_url }}
