---
layout: post
title: "The Guns of Wolfenstein, Part 01"
tags:
    - gurps
---

I've been playing a lot of Wolfenstein games these past few days. There's
something cathartic about unapologetically fighting Nazis. I first did it to
de-stress, and then to celebrate the results of our most recent election (go
Lula!).

And since I do occasionally want to post something here that's not Let's Read
the Monster Manual, I decided to talk a bit about the various guns you use to
kill Nazis in all of these games.

We're dealing with two separate continuities here: one that starts with Return
to Castle Wolfenstein (2001) and another that starts with Wolfenstein: The New
Order (2014). You could, if you're so inclined, include both of them in the
GURPS Infinite Worlds framework. I'd call then Wolfenstein-1 and Wolfenstein-2
respectively, though I guess Infinity might call the latter Reich-6 at first.

In this article, we'll cover the stuff that appears in Return to Castle
Wolfenstein (2001), AKA the Wolfenstein-1 setting.

## Game Overview

This is a flashier remake of Wolfenstein 3D, the game that more or less started
the FPS genre back in 1992. It's the first game in the franchise to have a more
fleshed out story wrapped around its gameplay, with voiced dialogue and
cutscenes elaborating on the simpler "you must escape the castle and kill Nazis"
plot of the 1992 game.

The game takes place in a pulpier version of WWII, where the Nazis are working
on a large variety of scary secret projects and the OSA (a joint Allied spy
agency) is sending agents to stop them from hitting the field. The player
character, as always, is William "B. J." Blazkowicz. He gets sent along with a
British agent to Castle Wolfenstein to find more about these projects, they get
captured, and the game starts with Blazko's escape attempt and moves on to
thwarting those projects to the Allies can win the war.

There are two sinister things going on here: an attempt by the Thule society to
resurrect ancient evil undead knights, and a mad science lab working to build
cyborg supersoldiers. The final boss is, of course, a bunch of cyborg
supersoldiers possessed by the spirits of ancient evil undead knights.

## Historical Weapons

Wolfenstein-1 is mostly a pulpier version of WWII, so a lot of the weapons we
see are historical and present on GURPS High-Tech. Though sometimes you'll start
a level with some Allied weapons issued by the OSA, the vast majority of the
time you'll be using captured German hardware.

OSA-issue weapons include the **Colt M1911A1** pistol (p. HT99), the **Thompson
M1** submachine gun (p. HT122), and the **Enfield Sten Mk IIS** submachine gun
(p. HT 125). The integral suppressor of the Sten works according to cinematic
principles here, making it completely silent to enemies.

Interestingly enough, one of the "elite guard" units you face in the game also
uses Stens, because they're meant to be sneaky and the Sten is the only
suppressed SMG in the game. The other OSA weapons are used exclusively by the
player character.

German weapons include the **Luger P08** pistol, (p. HT98), the **ERMA MP40**
SMG (p. HT 124), the **Mauser Kar98K** rifle (p. HT111), the **Rheinmetall
FG42** battle rifle (p. HT 115) and the **Panzerfaust** (p. HT147). The player
also uses these extensively, since every enemy drops ammo for one of them.

The FG42 is the signature weapon of the other "elite guard" unit in the game,
and has the scope described in its High-Tech entry. It's also possible to find a
suppressor for the Luger and a variable-power scope for the Mauser, which you
can stat up using the generic rules in p. HT 156 and p. HT 158.

You can occasionally also find a few **MG42** machine gun (p. HT 134)
emplacements in the game. There is also a flamethrower similar to the **M2-2**
(p. HT179), though this is probably the German equivalent rather than the
American version in the book.

Grenades also see use, with most of them being the German **Stielhandgranate
24**, and the rest American **AMC Mk II** models. Both are on p. HT190-191.

## Fictional Weapons

There's a lot of pulpy arms research going on here on both sides, so we also get
to see some weapons that don't exist in reality. We'll cover these in a bit more
detail.

### Snooper Rifle

This is a prototype sniper rifle issued to Blazkowicz by the OSA early in the
second mission of the game. You also find captured rifles later on while
breaking into one of the games' many secret lab facilities.

The Snooper is the most down-to-earth of the experimental weapons here, being an
exaggerated version of the **M3 Carbine** (p. HT113). Even the fancy infrared
sight is real! The biggest changes are the addition of a cinematic integral
suppressor that makes the gun completely silent, and making the infrared sight
more advanced than it really was. The one in the game has variable magnification
and requires no external batteries.

### Venom Machine Gun

This is the first entirely fictional weapon we encounter in the game, and the
second most unrealistic one. It's a portable, six-barreled, belt-fed minigun. It
has relatively short barrels, a shoulder stock and rifle-style grips. There's an
in-game document that describes it as firing 7.92mm saboted armor piercing
rounds, but the ammo for it is labeled as "12.7mm" in game. You first find the
Venom as a prototype in one of the secret labs that make up the game's levels,
and after that it starts appearing in the hands of some enemy human
soldiers. Most of the cyborg supersoldiers you meet towards the end of the game
also carry one.

We'll need custom stats for this one! Let's go with the assumption that it fires
7.92mm ammo, to make it minimally plausible for it to be portable. To make it a
little easier on the user, we can further say it fires the 7.92x33mm Kurz round,
instead of the longer 7.92x57mm Mauser round from the Kar98K.

The in-game Venom takes up to 500 rounds. These would probably be in a
disintegrating belt inside a metal can that can be worn as a backpack. The whole
thing weights around 16kg, more than the weapon itself. More reasonable 200 and
100 round belts with their smaller containers might weight in at 8 and 4kg
respectively.

We'll actually base the stats for it on the Minigun from page 138 of GURPS
Ultra-Tech, making the Venom a TL 7+2 weapon. The one on the table fires APDS
ammo, which is also TL 7+2 in this caliber, and has a 500-round belt.

| TL  | Weapon | Damage      | Acc | Range     | Weight    | RoF | Shots  | ST  | Bulk | Rcl |
|:---:|:------:|:-----------:|:---:|:---------:|:---------:|:---:|:------:|:---:|:----:|:----|
| 7+2 | Venom  | 6d+2(2) pi- | 4   | 1000/4000 | 15kg/16kg | 25! | 500(5) | 15M | -7   | 2   |

The Venom requires Guns (LMG) to operate, or Guns (Longarm) with the Burst-Fire
technique if using the alternate gun skill rules from Pyramid #3/65.

### Tesla Gun

The weapon used by the advanced cyborg supersoldiers you meet at the very end of
the game. Unlike the Venom this doesn't bear even the tiniest resemblance to any
real gun. Pull the trigger and it fires a stream of lightning until you release
it or until it runs out of charge.

The Tesla Gun draws power from a superscience backpack battery equivalent to a
TL 9 D cell, but four times heavier. Its damage follows the same rules as the
Lightning spell: metal armor only provides DR 1, and the target must make a HT
roll with a penalty of -1 for every 2 points of injury taken from it. Failure
means they're stunned, and must attempt an HT roll every turn in order to
recover.

| TL   | Weapon    | Damage        | Acc | Range    | Weight    | RoF | Shots  | ST  | Bulk | Rcl |
|:----:|:---------:|:-------------:|:---:|:--------:|:---------:|:---:|:------:|:---:|:----:|:----|
| 7+2^ | Tesla Gun | 4d+2 burn sur | 6   | 600/1900 | 35kg/10kg | 10  | 50 (5) | 18M | -8   | 1   |

The Tesla Gun requires Gunner (Beam) to operate, even when carried.

## How much for these fancy guns?

You'll notice that I ommitted any price information for the Venom and the Tesla
Gun above. That's because in Wolfenstein-1 they're secret prototypes with very
limited production runs. You don't buy them, you pry them from the hands of dead
Nazi assholes.

If you want to use them on a different setting where they are available for
purchase, use the following costs:

| Name                               | Cost    |
|:----------------------------------:|:-------:|
| Venom MG                           | $12.500 |
| Venom Ammo (100-round belt, APDS)  | $180    |
| Venom Ammo (100-round belt, solid) | $60     |
| Tesla Gun                          | $60.000 |
| Tesla Battery                      | $400    |

These are for a setting with a tech level of 7+2. If you're in a "plain" TL9
setting you might want to use the Minigun and Semi-Portable Electrolaser from
Ultra-tech, which have slightly better stats.

If your setting is like Wolfenstein-1, where the overall TL is a plain 7 and
these are secret superscience prototypes, multiply all prices by 4.
