---
layout: post
title: "Shadowrun: Goncharov"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - gurps
---

I've recently read about a fun Tumblr meme. It's about Goncharov, a 1973 Martin
Scorcese movie that never existed.

It began when someone posted a picture of these bootleg boots they bought
somewhere. The brand label had one of those word salads copied from somewhere
and edited by someone not too familiar with the target language. In this case,
it was copied from a poster for Gomorrah, a real movie. And it read "Martin
Scorcese presents Goncharov".

Tumblr [kinda ran with it][1], so now you have a lot of people making things up about
the movie and fabricating screenshots, posters, bits of soundtrack, talking
about all of this as if it was a real cinematic masterpiece.

Someone in a Discord server I frequent suggested Goncharov should become a
standard name for someone who doesn't exist, the opposite of John Doe. And this
got me thinking about Shadowrun again. Here are two uses for the name Goncharov
in a Shadowrun-like setting.

## The Mundane

In Shadowrun, "Mr. Johnson" is shadowrunner slang for a person who hires
shadowrunners. The stereotypical Mr. Johnson is a shady fuck in a suit who talks
in vague businesslike terms[^1], but it can be anyone who is willing to be the
"client" for a runner group. That's an established part of the game already.

So how about we say Goncharov is the "reverse" term? Goncharov is Johnson code
for shadowrunners! Sure "shadowrunners" is canon and also works well, but you
can't really write "shadowrunner payoff" in your official corporate ledger, can
you? So instead you write "payment to Goncharov for services rendered".

And just like no self-respecting mysterious client calls themselves Mr. Johnson,
no self-respecting runner calls themselves Goncharov. Someone who takes that as
their handle or even as an alias is telling the whole world they're a clueless
poser.

This little bit of culture works well in the Shadowrun setting itself, and on
any other setting that has stylish urban mercenaries as characters, including a
lot of GURPS Action or GURPS Cyberpunk campaigns.

## The Numinous

Let's go a bit further, shall we? Here's a mystical explanation that's a bit
more mystical than even Shadowrun's default setting allows for[^2], and is a bit
closer to Exalted's take on spirits and magic.

Goncharov is the Small God of Shadowrunners. He started out as an abstraction,
as above, but at some point became a real part of shadowrunning culture. Either
an existing spirit took on the mantle, or folk belief made him real.

_Real_ runners, those who are more than amoral assholes doing horrible things
for money, they have an understanding with Goncharov. They never forget the
corps and the big syndicates are the enemy even when circumstances force them to
work for these groups. They never sell out. They know who their community and
friends are, and they look out for them. And after every successful job, they
give Goncharov his cut.

Goncharov looks like a fit but somewhat scuffed up man in a nice but somewhat
scuffed up suit. The details vary, but he never looks overly fancy or
arrogant. In other words, he might look like John Wick after a fight or three,
but never like the Continental Hotel guy - that's the god of Mr. Johnsons.

Magicians can take Goncharov as a mentor spirit. He provides bonuses to combat
spells and Spirits of Man, whatever form those bonuses take in your edition of
choice. Non-magicians can also have "an understanding" with him for a slightly
cheaper price. This gives them access to the Goncharov's Cut rule.

### Goncharov's Cut

Those who have an understanding with the god of Shadowrunners, and keep to his
code, can gain extra Karma for giving him his cut. This includes magicians who
take him as a mentor spirit, or any character who spends points to buy a
slightly cheaper Edge representing the covenant.

If you're using the Karma for Cash rule in your game, such characters gain an
extra point of Karma when using the rule, if they would already gain at least
one point normally.

If that's not a general campaign rule, such characters still gain access to it,
becoming able to exchange money for a single point of Karma after every run.

In both cases the money goes to support and improve the runner's community, or
to help out fellow shadowrunners in need.

### In GURPS

In a GURPS Action or Cyberpunk campaign with supernatural elements, The
Understanding is a -10-point Code of Honor, since it's informal but applies to
people who are not your peers. Give Goncharov his cut and use it to support your
community and fellow runners; hunt down and punish any who betray them[^3];
never sell out; even if you need to do a job for a corp or a crime syndicate,
never forget they're the enemy.

This code can work as a "pact" limitation for supernatural or cinematic traits
related to being stealthy, discreet, or good at combat (yes, even Gunslinger or
a talent like Smooth Operator). It would provide a 10% discount on their price,
as normal, and would make these abilities unavailable until atonement if the PC
breaks the attached code. Goncharov's cut is also 10%. Following the code might
also lead to acquiring traits such as positive reputation among your community
or fellow runners, or Enemies in the form of traitorous villains and amoral
mercenaries who think you're weak for having a conscience.

[^1]: And who betrays you at the end.
[^2]: Though I understand it was kinda moving in this direction in its latest
    editions.
[^3]: Yes, you are totally following the code if you track Clockwork down and
    shoot him in the head after telling him "Goncharov says hi".

[1]: https://www.tumblr.com/hussyknee/701454778540146688/im-so-confused-rn-can-you-explain-the-goncharov
