---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Dread Warrior"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-dread-warrior.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Common zombies are mindless beasts who fight in a clumsy, instinctual way. Dread
warriors are... still mindless, but the ritual that creates them also imbues
them with more refined combat skills.

The main purpose of a dread warrior is to act as a guard and protector. Their
creation binds them to their master, whom they are compelled to protect and
obey. When a dread warrior's master dies, their reaction is a bit
unpredictable. Some lose their animating force and drop lifelessly to the
ground, others go berserk.

Instead of being bound to a person, they can be bound to an item instead,
protecting it from theft and damage even after their creator passes away. Liches
might use this to bind a troop of dread warriors to their soul receptacle, for
example.

## The Numbers

Dread Warriors are Medium Natural Animates with the Undead keyword. They have
low-light vision and a natural speed of 6, modified by armor. They have a
signature traits: **Eyes of Undeath** allows the warrior's master to see and
hear anything the creature sees and hears. It also allows the master to speak
through it. There's no range limit! This makes them excellent emissaries,
decoys, or security "cameras".

Individual warriors have additional traits related to their training and
intended function.


### Dread Protector

Your basic security model. Some necromancers like to fill their lairs with these
things so that they always have the reassuring presence of a bodyguard no matter
which room they are in. One does get used to the smell eventually.

Dread Protectors are Level 3 Soldiers with 47 HP. They wear heavy armor and
wield greataxes. Their speed is 5.

Aside from Eyes Undeath, they also have a **Shield of Undeath** aura (1). If
their master is inside this aura, they only take half damage from melee and
ranged attacks. The protector _does not_ take the other half of this damage,
making this a very good power.

The greataxe marks on a hit, and though the protector doesn't have any other
abilities that make use of the mark it does make it harder to attack the
master. Instead of moving normally they can use **Protector's Call** to teleport
their speed to square adjacent to the master. This makes it very hard for PCs to
isolate them.

Dread Protectors will seek to always stay adjacent to their master and keep the
most dangerous melee opponent marked. The best tactic for dealing with them is
to hit them with close or area attacks. These will target both them and their
master, ignoring both the mark penalty and Shield of Undeath.

### Dread Marauder

This lightly armored warrior wields a short sword and a bow. It's not any
smarter than the other dread warriors, but Eyes of Undeath still makes it a
superb scout since the master can see what it sees and order it from afar. If
they die out there, it's no great loss - the master knows what they need to know
by that point.

Dread Marauders are Level 5 Skirmishers with 53 HP and speed 6. They deal extra
damage when they have **Combat Advantage**, and **In the Master's Defense**
gives them combat advantage against anyone adjacent to their master.

The **sword** and **bow** give them both melee and ranged basic attacks, and
**Skirmish Strike** allows them to shift 3 squares before making either one.

So aside from being good scouts, dread marauders also serve as good deterrents
against melee PCs, since those PCs will be exposed to stronger attacks from the
marauder as long as they remain adjacent to the master.

### Dread Archers

These warriors are meant to act as sniper platforms and fire support for the
master, and to man the ramparts of the master's fortress. They're Level 6
Artillery with 57 HP and speed 6. Their gear is similar to the marauder's.

As artillery monsters, their **bow** attack is more accurate than the
**sword**. Once per encounter they can make an **arcing volley** area attack.

Their greatest powers are their custom passive trait and reaction, however!
**Channel of Undeath** allows the master to make implement attacks as if they
occupied the archer's square, as long as they can see the archer. And when the
master hits with an attack, the archer can use the **Sustained Attack** reaction
to make an immediate bow attack.

I am unsure whether I'd allow the master to "see" the archer through Eyes of
Undeath, but I'd definitely allow them so see the archer through a telescope!

### Dread Guardian

This is a more powerful version of the dread protector, a Level 7 Soldier with
79 HP. It's equipped with heavy armor, a shield, a sword, and a bow.

Both the **bow** and **sword** attacks mark on a hit, and this time the
protector _can_ make a sword attack as an opportunity action when a marked enemy
attacks the master.

## Final Impressions

"Zombie warriors" are almost as classic as "skeleton warriors" in the dungeon
fantasy genre, so I think these are pretty nifty. They're also awesome
mechanically, because Eyes of Undeath and the other passives allow for a lot if
interesting underhanded tricks.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
