---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Troglodyte"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-troglodyte.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

We already saw troglodytes in our reading of the [Monster Manual and Vault][2],
and their basic lore remains the same. We get a few additional entries with
their own lore here.

Like before, these troglodytes are Medium Natural Humanoids with the Reptile
keyword, and their signature ability is the **Troglodyte Stench**, an aura that
inflicts a -2 penalty to attacks. They have Darkvision and a speed of 5.

## Troglodyte Thrasher

We already discussed their lore in the [MM/MV post][2], so I'm not going to
repeat that discussion here. However we do get a bit of additional lore. It
seems thrashers are actually _nonsapient_, and their fellow troglodytes keep
them in cages when not using them as attack beasts. I wouldn't use this
"charming" bit of lore in my own campaigns.

## Troglodyte Deepscourge

Deepscourges are spellcasters. Like some poisonscale lizardmen, they follow a
tradition based on internal alchemy. The specific variant practiced by
deepscourges centers around manipulating and empowering their natural malodorous
secretions to turn them into damaging and debilitating spells. Like Curse
Chanters from the [MM/MV post][2], deepscourges act as priests and leaders of
troglodyte tribes, or as advisors to those leaders.

Deepscourges are Level 9 Artillery with the Leader keyword and 78 HP. Their
slime is turbocharged: it projects the same Troglodyte Stench aura as the
others, but it also projects an aura of **Dizzying Stench** out to 10 squares!
Despite the name this is actually a "buffing" effect, increasing the radius of
the stench of any troglodytes inside by 1 square. I wonder if the auras of
multiple deepscourges stack.

Their main ranged attacks are an at-will **Debilitating Ray** that deals
physical damage and weakens the target for a turn if it's inside a stench
aura. The stat block doesn't list an attack roll, but I guess this is an
editorial error and it should target AC.

They can also attack with an area-effect **Rancid Cloud** (recharge 5+), which
only affects "non-reptiles", targets Fortitude, does more damage than the ray
attack, and weakens for a turn.

When hit by an attack the deepscourge can project a **Blinding Stench** in a
burst around itself, targeting Fortitude and blinding (save ends) with no
damage. If that doesn't give it space to move away, it will be forced to use its
weak **claws** in melee.

## Troglodyte Temple Champion

As the name implies, these are troglodyte holy warriors, usually tasked with
guarding their temples. These temples usually honor Torog, but some are
dedicated to even worse entities like Demogorgon or other demons.

The blessings they receive tend to be subtle, of the type that makes them
smarter and more disciplined. They use a highly technical fighting style and
carry much better equipment than the rank and file. Though champions can be most
often found guarding a temple, they're also sometimes sent on divine missions at
the head of troglodyte expeditionary forces.

The Troglodyte Temple Champion is a Level 9 Soldier with 101 HP. It wears scale,
wields a flail, and also carries 2 javelins into battle. The **flail** and
**javelins** make up their basic attacks, and they also have a couple of special
techniques. **Sweeping Trip** is an at-will maneuver that does a bit less damage
than an attack and knocks prone. **Whirlwind Attack** is an encounter power that
does basic attack damage in a Close Burst 1.

No marking mechanic here - the champion's stickiness comes from their liberal
use of Sweeping Trips to keep opponents prone at their feet.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

I find the Deepscourge notable for being the first troglodytew stat block that
can't be easily re-skinned into another humanoid opponent. Its abilities are all
about the stench, both its own and that of its allies. It's a uniquely
troglodytic monster.

Other than that, my opinion on troglodytes hasn't changed much.

There's four sample encounters between levels 7 and 12, and they're all assorted
bands of troglodytes. Sometimes they're accompanied by drakes, and one of them
has a balhannoth that likely appears as an opportunistic predator during the
fight.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2021/01/08/troglodyte.html" | relative_url }}
