---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Scarecrow"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-scarecrow.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other.

The concept of scary animated scarecrows is a classic, so I'm sure they popped
up in earlier editions. This is their 4e debut.

## The Lore

Scarecrows in the middle world are straw mannequins placed on fields to keep
birds away. Scarecrows in the Feywild are terrifying constructs built to keep
_people_ away, and to tear them to pieces if they get too close. Both look the
same, so never forget which plane you're in.

The first animated scarecrows were created by a hag with straw stolen from a
farmer at the stroke of midnight, clothes from a freshly slain corpse, and
thread made from the hair of a nightmare. The idea spread quickly, and now lots
of different people use them. I imagine the recipes used by less evil creators
are not as macabre, though the construction of a scarecrow still involves a lot
of work.

Scarecrows are a bit less sturdy than golems, but they're much smarter. They can
understand more complex instructions and have a link to their master that allows
for long-distance, two-way communication. When a scarecrow spots an intruder, it
transmits what it sees to its master. They're alarm and surveillance systems in
addition to being guardians.

If the master dies, any surviving scarecrows will keep following their last
orders. This means you could find an ancient ruin guarded by masterless
scarecrows in the Feywild.

## The Numbers

Scarecrows are Medium Fey Animates (Constructs). They're immune to disease,
poison and sleep, though non-minion variants are also vulnerable 10 to
fire. They have low-light vision and a speed of 6.

### Scarecrow Shambler

A proper scarecrow takes months of careful work, with each stitch and each bit
of straw placed precisely in the configuration that will allow it to hold the
most magic reinforcement and power. A skilled enough ritual caster, however, can
cut a bunch of corners and and produce a small army of these crude models.

Shamblers are not much tougher than a mundane scarecrow, as their magic barely
holds them together. They are still strong enough to kill someone with their
bare hands, and are filled with toxic mold that spreads through the air when
they are destroyed.

These creatures are Level 10 Minion Brutes. Their basic attack is **claw** that
does physical damage with no special riders. When destroyed, they disintegrate
in a puff of moldy straw, creating a zone in a Close Burst 1 that lasts until
the end of the encounter. The zone is a poison cloud: it's lightly obscured and
deals 10 poison damage to anyone who starts their turn inside.

Clearly, shamblers are meant to die en masse and blanket the battlefield in a
giant poison cloud. An ignorant wizard might inadvertently help them along by
popping an entire group with an area attack. I guess they still act as cameras
for their master too.

### Scarecrow Guardian

The "baseline" model discussed in the lore section, painstakingly crafted to act
as a guardian. They're Level 13 Soldiers with 107 HP.

Guardians fight with their **Claws**, which damage and mark on a hit. They also
have a couple of gaze attacks: **Luring Gaze** (at-will) is a ranged attack that
deals psychic damage and pulls the target 5 squares; and **Horrid Gaze**
(minor action, encounter) is a Close Blast 3 that deals no damage and
immobilizes for a turn. These are tailored to allow the monster to prevent
intruders from escaping.

They're also deceptively hard to kill - the **Malleable Straw** interrupt kicks
in when they're damaged, and causes them to take half damage from the
attack. Since it's an interrupt, it only works once per round, but still makes
them more durable than their HP would indicate.

### Scarecrow Haunter

Haunters are created by adding an extra ingredient to the original scarecrow
recipe: the heart of someone who was killed by another scarecrow. It gets sewn
into the construct's body, from which it irradiates the fear its former owner
felt before dying. The haunter twists this raw emotion into frightening
illusions when hunting down intruders.

Haunters are Level 13 Lurkers with 99 HP. They fight with **Claws** and have
several interesting special attacks. The first one we must mention is the
**Lurking Horror** passive trait. It makes it so all of their attacks deal 5
extra damage and have their forced movement increased by 2 squares.

As lurkers, haunters can begin harrassing the party from a distance, while
safely hidden. **Haunting Echoes** an area burst 2 within 10 attack that targets
the Will of all enemies inside. A hit slides the target 2 squares and forces
them to make a basic attack against a creature of the haunter's choice as they
try to fight the imaginary ghosts conjured within their minds. With Lurking
Horror, this slide could be as large as 4 squares.

Once spotted, they can use **Terrifying Gaze** (recharge 5+) as a minor action
to keep the PCs at bay. This is a Close Blast 3 that targets Will, deals light
psychic damage, and pushes 2 squares.

Their "hiding" ability is **Fluttering Straw**, which allows them to seemingly
burst into a cloud of rotten straw and rags while teleporting 6 squares and
becoming invisible and insubstantial for a turn. They'll use it to avoid being
surrounded and to resume their stealthy "grenading" with Haunting Echoes.

## Final Impressions

Quite interesting! Animated scarecrows are always good for a bit of scary fun,
and these don't disappoint. I like the contrast with golems: the creation of a
D&D golem is described like a highly technical process that involves trapping
elemental spirits. The creation of a scarecrow is the telling of a scary fairy
tale, relying on the inherent narrative power of its ingredients.

Unless you choose to make less evil scarecrow recipes a thing in your setting,
they're probably the domain of hags, lamias and other paragon-tier evil fey. A
particularly ancient hag is going to have a small army of Guardians and Haunters
protecting her territory, and the realization that each of these represents at
least one of her previous victims will add to the horror of the situation.

If you want your Heroic-tier players to meet scarecrows without having to trek
to the Feywild, I would suggest statting the Shambler as a Level 3 Regular, and
knocking the other two down to level 6 or so.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
