---
layout: post
title: "Magic Item: The Coffee Machine From Hell"
tags:
    - gurps
    - items
---

I dreamed about this thing today, and what use is a blog if I can't use it to
write about the weird things I dream up?

## Description

This looks like a chunky, tabletop coffee machine of the sort that can be made
at TL8, and which might be found in an office. It's self-contained, with
internal reservoirs for beans and plastic cups. An authorized technician
supposedly refills those after working hours, but employees who stay late never
see this technician, no matter how late they stay. And yet, the machine never
seems to run out.

The device bears the name of a company that does indeed make this type of
appliance, though instead of their usual logo it has an upside-down star with a
smiley face. It has no model name or other contact information printed anywhere
on its body.

The Coffee Machine From Hell has a counter-intuitive control panel. Several
button presses are required to tell it what you want, but that's just bad
interface design. The Machine's true curse is more insidious.

As its name implies, the Coffee Machine From Hell is literally a torment device
built by demons. It will do its nominal job of producing cups of shitty office
coffee, but only if the user is making one for themselves (i.e, being
self-serving) or is thinking evil thoughts about the intended recipient of the
drink. Someone who's genuinely trying to help, or even just being neutral about
it, will find the machine seizes up or behaves unpredictably. Even if all
buttons are pressed correctly, it will spit mangled cups, spill hot liquid on
the countertop, make the wrong drink, and generally go out of its way to make
user experience a nightmare and to never ever produce whatever it is the third
party ordered.

Placed in an office where "making a coffee for someone else" is an accepted part
of the culture, the Machine will soon turn it into a nest of hate and
resentment. This is accelerated if the "someone else" is always the
boss. Unlucky interns and employees will cause mess after mess until they start
to truly hate the boss. The boss, in turn, will be frustrated that no one else
seems to be able to operate this "simple" machine that always works for them and
will come to hate their underlings in turn.

## Mechanics

Despite its shitty interface, no roll is required to operate the Machine. It
does however read the operator's mind to see if it should trigger the curse, in
which case it behaves as if a critical failure had been rolled. This will either
result in a humiliating mess, or in a normal-looking but undrinkable cup of
coffee that's sure to cause inflict a nasty surprise on its intended recipient.

Someone who is wise to the curse can try to trick the device into operating
normally with a successful **Mind Block** roll, or through any powers they have
that can shield their thoughts from telepathy. This roll can me made at the
usual **Will-5** default if the character lacks the skill.

The machine's infernal nature can be detected by any power or spell that detects
evil or infernal powers. It can be "cleansed" through **Exorcism** or equivalent
powers, like a more typical cursed artifact. Its greatest defense against
detection and exorcism is that neither of these abilities are common in the
settings in which it appears. Its true nature can't be detected by purely
scientific means.

## How to use it in a game

The Coffee Machine From Hell is a perfect addition to any oppressive office your
PCs must infiltrate for a while, particularly if they're undercover as
interns. It's something of a trap in that case: If everyone else already hates
each others' guts, the PCs will be the only one who trigger the curse, and this
will draw undue attention to them.

Obviously, every office _in_ Hell has one of these, but it can also be present
on Earthly companies under demonic influence, or just wind up in an otherwise
normal company without any explanation.

PCs on an infiltration mission will most likely need to trick the
machine. Exorcism attempts are too obvious and will likely blow their cover,
especially if they are actually infiltrating Hell. In an infiltration scenario
where the office is weird or evil in other ways, the machine is unlikely to be
the only obstacle they face.

In a campaign centered on paranormal investigation or monster hunting, the PCs
might be hired to find the problem behind a supernaturally toxic work
environment. If they have supernatural means of detecting evil, they'll be able
to easily find the Machine, but in those cases it might be only one of the
sources of trouble. If they must rely only scientific instruments, then finding
the Machine is considerably harder even if they can easily use Exorcism to
cleanse it.
