---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Tulgar"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-tulgar.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other.

This is the first time I'm seeing this monster. If they appeared in previous
editions, it was with a different lore.

## The Lore

Once upon a time, during the days of the Dawn War, there was a certain place in
the world that was a major nexus of primal power, connected to a great number of
spirits. This place was annihilated by one of the many cataclysms being thrown
around as weapons during that war. It was not the target - it was collateral
damage. And it was a god who pulled the trigger.

The spirits of that sacred site were cast into the world, rootless and
homeless. Spirits of place without a place, their rage against the gods knew no
bounds. In order to survive, they cast part of their spiritual nature aside and
took on material forms made of flesh, becoming the first tulgars. And then they
swore to destroy the gods and their servants in revenge for what was done that
day.

The tulgars would soon find out that attaining their revenge was much harder
than they thought. After the Dawn War ended, the gods retreated to their domains
and no longer stepped into the world. Their followers very quickly grew in
number and built complex societies that were much harder to destroy than the
scattered fleeting villages of the War. Many of the tulgars gave up on their
oath over the ages, and now live as bitter mercenaries. Some of them, though,
still keep that flame of hate going and try to find ways to accomplish their
original goal.

Metaphysically, a tulgar is more or less the primal equivalent of a daeva or
rakshasa. When they die, they are immediately reincarnated elsewhere in the
world in a new adult body, with intact memories of their previous lives. I don't
think they can reproduce by natural means, but they have been increasing their
numbers. They can sense when a primal spirit loses its home or becomes hateful
of sapient mortals or their gods, and converge to the spirit's location to
convince it to join their numbers.

## The Numbers

Tulgars are Medium Natural Humanoids with a ground Speed of 7 and the Forest
Walk trait. Their signature ability is **Unbroken Spirit**, which triggers when
they hit 0 HP and gives their nearest ally a "parting gift" of 10 temporary HP
and a +2 to attacks, defenses, and damage that lasts for a turn.

All the stat blocks here present us with early-epic threats, which is
appropriate for a people who swore vengeance on the gods and has a real shot at
achieving this. It's possible they would make good allies for the Forsaken,
since they have similar goals.

### Tulgar Flesh Hunter

A hunter of sapient prey, with centuries of accumulated experience. This is a
Level 22 Skirmisher with 209 HP. It fights with a **Spear** and a **Handaxe** it
uses as a thrown weapon. Its **On the Hunt** trait makes it not provoke
opportunity attacks when it moves for a turn after hitting an enemy.

The flesh hunter can use **Hunter's Onslaught** to make both a spear and a
handaxe attack against different targets on its turn. The ranged attack doesn't
provoke opportunity attacks when used as part of this power, and the power can
be used in place of a basic attack during a charge! In other words, no reason to
use a single basic attack when this is available.

Additionally, flesh hunters can use a **Rotting Strike** (recharge 5+) to deal
light damage and inflict ongoing necrotic damage on the target (save ends).

### Tulgar Savage

This unfortunately named enemy is a Level 22 Minion Brute. They have a **spear**
and a **handaxe** like the flesh hunter, though it does minion-scale
damage. Their **Critical Threat** ability allows them to crit on a 19-20, and
when they do they grant a free melee basic attack to an ally within 2 squares.

Oh, and they have Unbroken Spirit too, so they make a powerful contribution to
their allies by dying.

### Tulgar Half-Spirit

A tulgar that keeps more of its spirit side than most others. It's a Level 23
Lurker with 116 HP, and it's Insubstantial.

Its basic attack is a **Claw** that deals minor necrotic damage and immobilizes
for a turn. It also turns the tulgar invisible for a turn as an effect. If it
hits someone who can't see it, the half-spirit also dazes the target for a turn,
so there's your lurker loop right there. It can also throw **handaxes** if no
one is at hand.

When the half-spirit becomes bloodied for the first time, it **Unleashes the
Inner Spirit** (close burst 3 vs. Fortitude), dealing necrotic damage and
stunning those it hits for a turn. The half-spirit then becomes invisible for a
turn and teleports 5 squares.

### Tulgar Warrior

This elite combatant doesn't care about ranged attacks, and is all about
charging to melee and laying waste to armies. It's a Level 23 Brute with 265
HP. Its **Inveterate Warrior** trait makes it crit on a 19-20, and deal 3d12
extra damage on a crit. That last bit might just be a codification of its
**greataxe's** High Crit trait, since it's not spelled out in this stat block.

The warrior's basic axe attacks also inflict a -2 AC penalty for a turn. Its
**Whirling Frenzy** maneuver is an encounter power that allows it to attack
everyone in a Close Burst 1, shift 3 squares and repeat the burst attack once
more against anyone who wasn't hit by the first one.

### Tulgar Spirit Talker

Some tulgars retain a stronger connection to their former spirit nature and can
use that to cast spells. However, the other side of that connection is still
_broken_, and this slowly erodes their mental stability. Over time, a spirit
talker might become unable to live in its community, and the others consider it
a mercy to kill them so that their minds might be mended by the process of
reincarnation.

Spirit Talkers are Level 24 Controllers with 225 HP. They project a **Primal
Barrier** aura (2) that makes all spaces inside difficult terrain for creatures
without phasing or forest walk. It fights with a **Spear** whose attacks make
the target be marked by one of the tulgar's allies within 10 squares. Its ranged
basic attack is the **Incite Savagery** spell, which deals psychic damage and
has an interesting rider. If the target doesn't make a melee attack on its next
turn, it grants combat advantage until the end of its following turn. A great
power to use on primarily _ranged_ attackers!

As a minor action the spirit talker can cast **Dismissal** (recharge 4+), which
targets a conjuration, summoned creature, or zone within 10 squares. It attacks
the Will of its creator, and on a hit it causes the target effect to end! If
there's nothing to dispel, the spirit talker can use **Call Spirit Warrior** to
summon a tulgar minion to its side, acting right after it in initiative order.

Instead of Unbroken Spirit, the Spirit Talker has **Death's Embrace**, which
works the same but makes its aura stick around as a zone with the same effects
until the end of the encounter.

## Final Impressions

I like the lore of the tulgars here, because you can see how they might have a
reason for being bitter and angry. I'll note that the stat blocks here are all
Unaligned, which means the book might agree with me. The only thing I dislike
here is the use of the word "savage" in both the minion's name and the spirit
talker's ranged attack.

You can play some tulgar groups as being vengeful against the gods and perhaps
leaning more towards Evil, but you can also portray them as people who gave up
on that vengeance but still can never go back to what they were, which is a very
different story. Maybe some of them might be looking for a way to become full
spirits again, and it might be something that brings them into alliance with the
PCs or with sympathetic NPCs.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
