---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Giant, Hill"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-giant-hill.png" | absolute_url }}" width=800/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Another entry that that adds extra stat blocks to complement the existing MM1
and upcoming Monster Vault monsters. This one is for hill giants.

The new lore here is minimal or restates things we saw elsewhere. Hill Giant
bands are usually small and consist of a single family group - they're too
anti-social to form more complex organizations. Every once in a while a larger
group will manage to hold together for an extented period of time. Their leaders
style themselves kings, and the log fortresses they build are known as
steadings. You might have heard about a famous adventure with the words
"Steading", "Hill Giant" and "King" in its title, wink wink.

## The Numbers

As usual, Hill Giants are Large Natural Humanoids (Giants), with a basic speed
of 8. All of the ones here look like the iconic club-swinging D&D giant, with
the big difference being in how they fight.

### Hill Giant Smashers

A Smasher is pretty much a "Hill Giant Lite". It's slightly weaker than a
standard MV giant, and doesn't throw rocks. To compensate, it's more mobile and
has a few more tricks in melee. This is the stat block you use for those lone
mercenary giants that get hired as living tanks by smaller evil humanoids like
hobgoblins, bugbears, or gnolls.

Smashers are Level 11 Brutes with 137 HP. They have a passive **Mobility** trait
which allows them to roll saves against being slowed, immobilized, or restrained
at the start of their turns instead of at the end. This also works for any
save-ends effect that includes these conditions, like "ongoing 5 damage and
slowed (save ends both)".

Like all giants in this entry they wield Reach 2 **Greatclubs**, and their basic
attack deals a bit of automatic splash damage to a secondary target on a
hit. Once per encounter they can perform a **Whirling Crush** to attack everyone
in a close burst 2, and they can also perform a **Brutal Smash** that deals
double damage and recharges on a miss. So they'll keep trying that one until
they hit.

### Hill Giant Rockthrower

The MM1 and MV give us an artillery giant that uses big javelins. But if you
want your giants to throw rocks and nothing but rocks, the Rockthrower is for
you.

Rockthrowers are Level 12 Artillery with 97 HP. As artillery monsters, their
**Greatclub** attacks are kinda weak, but their basic ranged attack is a
**Knockdown Throw** that does a bit more damage, pushes the target 2 squares,
and knocks them prone. They can also throw with a bit more force for a
**Shattering Rockburst** (recharge 5+), which deals damage in an area and dazes
on a hit.

They use the same tactics as a catapult: seek high ground, rain death from
above. I imagine hiring a bunch of rockthrowers is quite a bit cheaper than
maintaining your own siege engines.

### Hill Giant Avalancher

Avalanchers are the heroic prodigies of their people. They're much smarter than
your typical hill giant, and often end up as leaders or kings. They get their
name from their clever rock-throwing tricks and from their brutal charges.

An Avalancher is a Level 14 Skirmisher with 139 HP. They can make basic
**Greatclub** attacks and perform **Crushing Charges** that do the same amount
of damage and knock targets prone. From a distance they can throw **Rolling
Rocks**, which in addition to doing damage on a hit slide the target 4 squares,
knock them prone, and gather no moss.

After they knocked a bunch of PCs prone, Avalanchers will move using **Stomping
Shifts**, which allow them to shift 4 squares and pass through prone enemies'
spaces. They deal an automatic 8 damage to a prone enemy when they pass through
their spaces.

Avalanchers will always try to use their Crushing Charge if possible, and will
make use of Stomping Shift to position themselves for a new charge and to deal
additional damage to prone enemies. They use Rolling Rocks to break up tricky PC
formations and to return fire against ranged attackers they can't charge.

## Final Impression

It's more hill giants, which it's okay because I like hill giants. I like that
the Smasher is explicitly meant to be included as the "surprise bruiser" in a
lower-leveled humanoid group. A smasher and its humanoid employers work well as
a boss battle for a group of level 8-10 PCs, depending on how many other
monsters you add.

The Avalancher gives you an interesting option for a leader type who is not a
titan.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
