---
layout: post
title: "The Orchard of Time"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - dnd
---

I had an interesting dream recently that gave me what I think is a neat idea for
a dungeon location: The Orchard of Time.

## History

It's started out as your standard divine orchard, a bit like the Garden of the
Hesperides. It was owned and operated by a powerful spirit or minor deity, and
its trees gave fruit that ranged from "mundane but high-quality" to "outright
miraculous" the further in you went. If you got to the very center, you could
harvest the Peaches of Immortality or something equally awesome.

Something happened to the Orchard's original owners and they left, abandoning
the place. Monstrous fauna from the surrounding regions moved in and either
overwhelmed the previous guardians or entered some sort of symbiosis with
them. These new monsters found ample food in the trees of the Orchard, whose
energies mutated them to be larger and stronger.

One day, a powerful arch-wizard found the Orchard's location and decided to go
for the Peaches. This extremely arrogant individual was sure he would succeed
where all others have failed. After all, the others weren't him! He armed
himself with his best spells and his best magic items, and teleported to the
Orchard's entrance (can't teleport into it from outside). Then he boldly strode
past the gate, and cast his most powerful magic.

This was a custom spell that would stop time everywhere in the Orchard except
for an area five meters or so in radius around the wizard himself. The idea was
that, with time stoped, the archmage could just walk up to the really good trees
in the center while dodging the place's many inhabitants. If he needed to remove
any of them, he could bring them into the "active time" circle and use his other
magic to handle them one individual or small group at a time.

Of course, the wizard's hubris got the better of him at exactly the worst
time. Maybe he had miscalculated when creating the spell, or maybe he made a
critical error when casting it. The fact is that our wizard just
kinda... exploded, leaving behind only his ornate metal staff.

Ironically, the spell itself worked exactly as planned. Even better in fact, as
the same error that deleted our wizard made it last forever. It's centered on
the wizard's staff, which stands planted on the ground just inside the Orchard's
entrance gate.

## Layout and Hazards

The Orchard is located in a hidden valley and is bordered by tall forested
mountains. The climate can range from temperate to tropical depending on what
kind of fruit you want it to contain. As mentioned above, vestigial divine wards
prevent people from finding it with divination or from teleporting into it from
outside. It can still be found via good old-fashioned research, as its location
is recorded in ancient religious texts and in the unfortunate wizard's own
notes. The wizard has also helpfully dispelled any magical defenses that
prevented people from just walking through the main gate.

The Orchard of Time was a little overgrown from its period of abandonment, but
still retains its characteristic layout. There are many trees but they're spaced
far apart. Cobbled paths wind their way among them. Grass and other wild plants
reach up to a human's knees between the trees and paths. This space used to be
taken up by a lawn and flower beds, but these have been overwhelmed by native
plants.

This means that despite covering a very large area, the Orchard has excellent
sight lines and a clearly navigable layout. You can see a good deal of its
significant landmarks from the entrance gate and it's impossible to get lost
inside. These excellent sight lines work against intruders such as the PCs,
because they allow the many, many monsters and guardians that live here to see
them from far away. These creatures are all hostile, territorial, and generally
incapable of dialogue either because they have animal intellect or because
they're some sort of construct. In the dream I had these monsters definitely
included a variety of Rodents of Unusual Size. There are almost more monsters
than there are fruit, and they all more or less converge on the location of any
intruders they can perceive.

Or they _would_, if time hadn't stopped inside. The wizard's staff is just
inside the entrance, and it projects a field of "normal time" in a 5-meter
radius around itself. Everything outside this bubble and inside the orchard's
outer walls is frozen in time, and has been for a long time (decades?
centuries?).

PCs who want to succeed where the arrogant wizard failed need to carry the staff
with them. Getting close enough to a monster that it enters the "bubble" will
unfreeze the creature, and it will imediately attack. There might be a route
that allows them to avoid most of the creatures, but not all.

In addition to the copious monsters, the permanent time stop might have created
hazardous areas inside the Orchard, where space or time itself behave in harmful
ways. These might be almost impossible to detect until they're inside the active
time bubble, which would make them reveal themselves in a dramatic fashion.

## Why go there?

The most obvious reason to delve the Orchard of Time is to get its most awesome
fruits from the big trees at the center, like the wizard wanted to do. The
Orchard might also contain buildings of interest (such as libraries or treasure
vaults), along with the bodies of ancient adventurers who tried to delve the
place before the ill-fated wizard. Some of these might be legendary themselves,
and have died carrying their equally legendary gear.

A slightly alternate Orchard would have been invaded by the wizard while it was
still operational! In this case it's going to be in pristine condition, with all
of its original guardians and security systems still in place. Even its _owners_
will still be around, frozen in time like flies in amber. Freeing them is an
excellent goal for more heroic sorts, or at least for sorts who need the
specific help whose divine entities are able to provide.

However, since those owners are frozen in time, they're still going to be under
the impression that they're being invaded by a cheeky wizard. And look at you,
carrying his staff around like that. Better talk fast!
