---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Girallon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-girallon.png" | absolute_url }}" width=800/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Remember how, way back in the ["Ape"][2] entry, I commented that I wasn't fond
of the "pulp fiction carnivorous gorilla" cliches some of them were leaning on?
Then you might imagine how I feel about this particular monster. I first saw
them in the 3e Monster Manual, but they might have appeared in a supplement for
an earlier edition.

A girallon is what happens when you take every single one of those cliches, lump
them together, and double the result. It's an evil carnivorous gorilla that has
twice the size, twice the appetite for human flesh, and twice the number of arms
as the standard version of the trope. To complete the cliche bingo card,
girallons have white fur and are frequently worshipped as gods by "savage
jungle-dwelling tribes". So yeah, not a great look so far.

Girallons are voracious carnivores and messy eaters that have the habit of
leaving viscera and entrails lying around their territories. They can climb and
move through the treetops with practiced ease, but their large size means they
need to sleep on the ground. Their lairs are usually in caves or ruins. Though
not sapient, some of them learn to make trails in their territory's vegetation
that lead to prime ambush spots, which can act as an effective lure for sapient
prey.

Girallons are usually the most badass predators in their region. They're either
solitary or organized in small bands, and do not willingly seek out allies of
other species. Still, they're sometimes "tamed" by giants, trolls, fomorians and
other such sapients. Prospective girallon keepers must be either big and strong
enough to physically beat the creatures into submission, or have the knowledge
of magic necessary to keep them dominated.

## The Monsters

### Girallon

The basic model and the template used for the others. This is a Large Natural
Beast and a Level 12 Brute with 145 HP. It has a ground speed of 8 and a climb
speed of 6. Its four arms act as a **Threatening Claws** aura (1) that makes all
enemies inside grant combat advantage, and a **Combat Climber** trait that make
it not provoke opportunity attacks when climbing.

The basic **claw** attack is Reach 2 and does the heavy damage expected of a
brute, and the **Claw Flurry** special (recharge 5+) allows it to make four
half-damage claw attacks.

### Girallon Alpha

This specimen is much bigger and stronger than a typical girallon. It has all
the same traits as the basic model but is level 17 with 195 HP. It has two new
abilities as well.

The first is a positioning thing: **Whirling Claws** is a free action triggered
when an enemy starts its turn within 2 squares of the alpha. The alpha slides
that enemy 1 square, which is perfect for breaking flanking maneuvers.

The other is a special attack: **Rend and Tear** targets enemies in a Close
Blast 3, does heavy damage, and slides the targets 3 squares on a hit.

### Infernal Girallon

A long time ago some devils decided infusing packs of girallons with the power
of Hell for use as bioweapons in the Blood War would be a swell idea. Now there
are packs of Infernal Girallons roaming and hunting through both the Elemental
Chaos and the Nine Hells.

These have all the same traits as a basic girallon but are Immortal instead of
Natural. They have the Devil keyword and Darkvision. They're Level 22 Brutes
with 249 HP and all the same abilities as a basic girallon.

Their first new power is a trait named **Burning Soul**. This aura (2) causes 10
fire damage to enemies caught inside, or 20 if the girallon is bloodied. Better
give your defenders some protection from fire.

Their other new power is an attack named **Burning Ichor**, a Close Blast 3 that
does immediate and ongoing fire damage (save ends).

So yeah, an even bigger girallon that is on fire.

## Final Impressions

You already know my opinion of their lore. I'm tempted to reskin these things
into demons or some other type of monster. I guess the exception is the lore for
Infernal Girallons. "Devils tried to do science, it did not go as planned" is a
good hook.

Mechanically, the Girallon is a basic paragon-tier brute, serviceable but not
spectacular. The enhanced versions add more interesting special attacks, so
depending on your needs you might want to down-level an alpha instead of using
the basic version.


[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2022/05/04/ape.html" | relative_url }}
