---
layout: post
title: "A Short Review: Cyberpunk RED"
tags:
    - review
    - cyberpunk-red
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/CyberpunkCoverArt.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

I remember buying the Cyberpunk 2020 core book around the mid-nineties. By then
it was already in its second edition. The first one was titled Cyberpunk 2013,
and it was released in 1988, making it the first actual cyberpunk RPG (Shadowrun
would arrive in 1989).

This system and its subsequent iterations remained mostly at the edges of my
awareness for a long time, since I was more of a Shadowrun fan. But recently I
started playing the Cyberpunk 2077 video game and I liked it enough that I
decided to also check out the latest edition of the tabletop game, Cyberpunk
RED.

The first thing I notice is that this is a _big_ book. Nearly 500 pages in
length, I'm sure it would be quite hefty if it was a physical copy. The first
half of it is player-facing information starting with a setting overview,
character creation, basic rules, combat and finally netrunning. The second half
is a more detailed description of the setting, and then GM advice including a
series of short adventures.

When it comes to layout and presentation, R. Talsorian definitely learned from
its past mistakes with the ill-fated Cyberpunk V.3. Cyberpunk RED's layout is
pretty clean, and its sans-serif font quite readable (to me at least). Page
margins have tastefully minimalistic decoration (done in red, of course) and the
illustrations are gorgeous and very detailed. Very little of the text is
obviously copied from CP 2020, surely another lesson learned from CP V3.

The mechanics are pretty much a new iteration of the Interlock system used by
CP2020. The basic numbers are tweaked a bit, but it should be pretty familiar to
anyone who played the earlier edition and pretty easy for newcomers to
learn. There are some useful artifacts from FUZION that managed to sneak into
the game, like the concept of "everyday skills" every character should know.

The combat rules are a bit simpler all around and should be fairly fun, but I
dislike that they do the "Martial Arts Thing" that was so common in a lot of
RPGs written in the 90s. You can be a pleb and learn Brawling, or you can learn
one of four elegant Martial Arts styles from the far and mysterious East! They
make your fists into registered lethal weapons and give you access to deadly
Secret Techniques! Bleh. I dislike the exoticism implied in this view.

Armor is really good compared to gun damage, and there is a very clear
"firefight meta" going on here. An unarmored character is going to go down
quickly, but it's very easy to get concealable armor that will stop most bullets
at least 50% of the time. Practically every sample PC and opponent wears this
exact armor _and_ carries the only handgun with a better than even chance of
getting through. The only ones who wear or carry anything lighter are those
enemies whose main distinction is having shitty gear, and those PCs for whom
combat is a tertiary concern.

The netrunning rules do a solid job of avoiding the pitfalls from the original
set. A hacking session is still a sort of mini-dungeon-crawl, but it's a lot
more abstract and well-integrated into "meatspace" initiative. It also requires
the netrunner to be on-site, so that they can participate in the physical side
of the adventure with the rest of the group. My main criticism here is that
these rules remain very tightly coupled to their corresponding setting elements,
just like they were in CP2020. The new netrunning system comes accompanied by a
bunch of cataclysmic setting changes and a technical explanation that's pretty
much just a word salad. Luckily this is extremely easy to eject.

The cyberware rules are essentially the same as always, though they carve a few
important and long overdue exceptions to the Humanity Loss rules. Still, I feel
they could have gone further.

As for the setting... I'll be honest, I never knew there was so much backstory
and metaplot to it. I remember the setting section in CP 2020 as a sort of
"lightly flavored background soup" that was just there to explain why you had
cybered-up folks being all punky in this fictional city. CP RED decides to delve
way deep into it, with a huge historical section that serves as a stealth "2020
era" supplement before moving on to the 2045 narrative present of this
game.

While I think the narrative presents of RED and 2077 are both very interesting,
I have a lot of nits to pick with all that backstory and metaplot, and with the
ways it seems to remain static for a long time or loop over itself. Personally,
I'd probably move up its divergence point with the real world by a good 30+
years and condense a lot of the subsequent events up to 2077 into something more
dynamic and streamlined.

Proceeding to the GM advice, I finally find out where the copied text from
previous editions is this time. The first couple of pages in this section
reproduce a lot of advice I remember seeing from editions past. Some of it is
serious, some of it is a tongue-in-cheek parody, all of it feels very dated when
read in The Actual Year of 2022. Apparently the reader is supposed to easily
distinguish the real advice from the jokes, but in my experience that never
really works.

After we get past this bit of cringe, we get to advice on plotting
adventures. Though it talks in terms of "script-writing", it does recognize
things will go off-script and that improvisation is essential. "Just roll with
it" is very basic advice but it's still welcome.

The system for awarding XP at the end of each session recommends classifying
players according to their playstyles, and evaluating them based on how well
they stuck to that classification. The combat monster should get XP for fighting
well, the roleplayer for roleplaying well, and so on. I'd have been all over
this back when 2020 was still the distant future. These days, though, I don't
want to have to tell Player A that they got less XP than Player B for failing to
live up to the way I think they should play. In my games, when someone does
something worthy of a XP bonus, _everyone_ gets that bonus. We all lift
together!

Finally, just like in CP2020, there's a section of "screamsheets", two-page
spreads containing a handful of fictional news articles on the left and a
mini-adventure on the right. These are entertaining.

## Final Impressions

It might seem like I'm complaining a lot, but I'd happily play Cyberpunk
RED. The system is simple and very playable, and most actual groups are likely
to care little about deep metaplot cuts. It's a good game overall.

Speaking as a GM, I don't think the CP RED system clears my personal "Treshold
of GURPS". If I had ample time to prepare and plan, I'd probably adapt its
setting to that system. However I'd happily run the game as-is if I had to do it
on the spot. I'd just hand out the ready-made RED iconics as PCs, and pick one
of the short adventures at the back of the book.

In either case, if the setting's timeline was important, I'd probably use the
hypotethical condensed version I mentioned earlier. And I'm definitely going to
ditch that advice that says a group of PCs can't hope for anything more than
their own survival and maybe doing some small good beyond that. You don't get to
say that and have a setting where Rache Bartmoss can take the whole NET and
quite a few megacorps down in one fell swoop, and where Johnny Silverhand's
raids on Arasaka Tower are practically a regular event. If these clowns can have
that much of an impact, then so can any PC group whose players are interested in
this sort of game.
