---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Felldrake"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-felldrake.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Felldrakes are a Vale-specific new addition to the game.

## The Lore

Shortly after signing the pact that transformed them, the ruling nobility of
Bael Turath set about applying their newfound infernal power in several ways
they felt would benefit the empire. One of the things they did was magically
alter the many breeds of drake the Turathi already employed to make them
stronger and more vicious. These magically altered breeds became known as
felldrakes.

Though felldrakes are considered natural animals, they're much more aggressive
and territorial than other species and are susceptible to control via old
Turathi techniques and infernal magic. The Fell Court from our previous entry
was taught the secret of controlling these creatures by their diabolical
patrons. It's possible other groups have learned it as well.

## The Numbers

Like other drakes, these are Natural Beasts. They're a varied lot, though, and
their abilities are specific to each stat block.

### Leaping Felldrake

This Small drake looks like a green-scaled lizard. As the name implies they're
capable of long flying leaps, but they're also pretty good at lying in
ambush. Their jaws are very efficient at biting the necks of their victims, and
their saliva contains a weak venom that turns the flesh around the bite mark
blue. They were used to protect homes and vaults from burglars, and those blue
marks aided in tracking any culprits that escaped.

Leaping Felldrakes are Level 1 Lurkers with 26 HP. They have ground and climb
speeds of 6. Their basic **bites** are a little weak, but they can use **Neck
Bites** against targets granting them combat advantage. This deals about double
the damage of a basic bite and allow the drake to grab the target (escape DC
12), dealing them ongoing 5 damage while the grab lasts.

The drake's **Flying Leaps** allow them to fly 3 squares without provoking
opportunity attacks. If they have cover, concealment, or no enemies within 5
squares, they can use **Instant Camouflage** to become effectively invisible
until they attack or cancel the effect. That's how it gains combat advantage in
most situations, though flanking also works fine in a fight against multiple
monsters.

### Crested Felldrakes

These Small drakes are kinda like a cross between a standard [guard drake][2]
and a Jurassic Park raptor. They're pack hunters like unmodified guard drakes,
but they're stronger and smarter than then. Crested felldrakes have been known
to climb on top of one another to reach high places, or to open doors with their
claws to get at victims on the other side.

Crested Felldrakes are Level 2 Skirmishers with 39 HP. They have a ground speed
of 8 and their **Pack Frenzy** trait gives them +1 to hit and +2 to damage when
adjacent to a felldrake ally. Their **bites** damage and allow a felldrake ally
within 2 squares of the attacker to shift up to 2 squares as a reaction. When
hit by an opportunity attack, they can automatically shift 2 squares. This
doesn't negate the damage from the attack, but it also doesn't use up an action,
so it can be done as often as you like. The more you hit them, the more mobile
they are.

### Hissing Felldrake

Another Jurassic Park-inspired monstrosity, this is a Medium drake with a large
folding frill around its neck and the ability to spit a corrosive venom laced
with soporific chemicals. It's Level 3 Artillery with 38 HP.

They can **bite** but the star of the show is clearly their **Fell Spit**, a
ranged attack that targets Reflex and deals acid damage. If the target is
bloodied, they become slowed for a turn. If they're already slowed, they instead
become dazed (save ends).

### Tri-Horned Felldrake

The larger and most aggressive of the felldrake subspecies, but also oddly
enough the easiest to domesticate. The Turathi enforced an instinctive pecking
order with tri-horns at the top, so they have some ability to control other
felldrake species.

Tri-horns are Medium Level 4 Soldiers with 58 HP. They have a speed of 5, are
immmune to fear, and gain a +3 to damage when charging. They can **bite** and
also perform **challenging gores** that deal about the same damage and mark for
a turn. If a marked target makes an attack that doesn't target the drake, it can
use a melee reaction to automatically deal light damage and knock them prone.

## Final Impressions

The origin of the felldrakes gives you ample excuse to have a wild pack of them
that attacks on sight and fights to the death, unlike most natural
beasts. However they really come into their own as pets to the Fell Court or to
other similar groups that know how to control and boost them in the same way.

They could also be used as additional Dark Drake species to go with the Dark
Drake of the Moon Hills. Maybe the Dark Drake is a supernaturally powerful
felldrake who survives since the days of Bael Turath?

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2020/01/27/drakes.html" | relative_url }}
