---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Yuan-ti"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

In a situation that's familiar to us by now, Yuan-ti would get a revamp and a
lore infusion in the upcoming Monster Vault (and you can see how that looks like
[here][2]), and this entry presents stat blocks that complement the ones that
would come out in the MV.

## The Lore

The lore section of this page lacks the nifty creation myth from the MV entry,
sticking to a more generic "perfidious infiltrators" profile for the yuan-ti. It
does add a new bit, however: the snake god Zehir doesn't just want to see his
favorite people thrive in the world. His true goal is to become the supreme
authority in the cosmos. Zehir is convinced that the universe can only withstand
the return of the primordials if it's led by the strong hand of a single
absolute ruler.

So this means we have at least two authoritarian assholes in our current
pantheon: Asmodeus and Zehir. Big Z's goals are not widely known in the world -
only his most powerful and trusted servants are privy to this mystery. There are
other gods who are aware of this but they're content to merely keep an eye on
the snake god as long as his machinations continue to hurt their enemies. Things
might get more heated should Zehir explicitly turn against his fellow deities.

## The Numbers

Yuan-ti are Medium Natural Humanoids with the Reptile keyword. They have a
ground speed of 7, and 5/tier poison resistance.

While the MM1 and Monster Vault gave us heroic and paragon stat blocks for
snaketongue cultists and yuan-ti, the MM3 gives a bunch of high-epic stat blocks
that apparently represent those individuals who are closest to Zehir and
actively working towards his goal of complete world domination.

There's plenty here for all sorts of all-yuan-ti encounters, but they also
employ various sapient humanoid cultists, and make pets or allies of any
creature who is even remotely similar to a snake.

The individual stat blocks are relatively simple, making me think PCs are
supposed to face them in large numbers. It would certainly be possible to
downscale them to lower levels without changing much else about their stat
blocks.

### Coil of Zehir

A Large yuan-ti who's almost completely snaky, its arms almost vestigial. It's a
Level 26 Controller with 235 HP.

The Coil's basic attack is a Reach 3 **Slam** that does light physical damage,
pulls the target 2 squares, and grabs it on a hit. The Coil can only have one
victim grabbed at a time, and it can hit them with **Crushing Coils** for an
automatic 40 damage that also dazes them for a turn. As a minor action, it can
use a Close Burst 3 **Tail Sweep** that does no damage and knocks targets prone.

The Coil wants to grab hold of someone and squeeze them to death, using tail
sweeps to keep would-be rescuers away. Dazed victims can still try to get away
(Athletics DC 38 or Acrobatics DC 39), but their other options are sharply
limited.

### Yuan-ti Abomination Berserker

Abominations are those 'snakier' yuan-ti with humanoid torsos but the lower
body of a giant snake. Another Large variant, Berserkers know how to fight and
know they shouldn't attack other yuan-ti or cultists. That's about it. The
others treat them nicely to avoid accidents, and then point them at whoever they
want dead. Berserkers are Level 27 Brutes with 293 HP.

These creatures fight with Reach 2 **Slams** that do heavy physical
damage. Every so often they'll spin and do a **Roundhouse Slam** (recharge 4+),
making a basic attack against every adjacent enemy. If you hit them while
they're bloodied, they can make a free slam against you as a reaction. Simple
but effective.

### Yuan-ti Malison Guard

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-yuan-ti-guard.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Malisons are the more humanoid yuan-ti, still covered in scales and with snake
heads, but otherwise humanoid. This is an elite front-line fighter who serves
Zehir proudly despite the shame of having legs. It's a Level 27 Soldier (Leader)
with 242 HP. It knows how to fight in formation and its **Overlapping Scales**
aura (1) gives a +2 bonus to AC to all allies inside.

Guards fight with **scimitars** and **longbows**, both of which deal decent
damage and inflict ongoing poison damage (save ends). The scimitar marks for a
turn on a hit.

These creatures want to be in a tight formation with either other melee allies,
or with an artillery detachment.

### Yuan-ti Abomination Spitter

An abomination with well-developed venom glands that produce a "blessed" venom
far deadlier than that of a mundane snake. It's Level 27 Artillery with 186
HP. It can **Spit Venom** out to Range 20, dealing immediate and ongoing poison
damage on a hit. It can also **Spray Venom** (recharge 4+) on a close burst 5,
dealing poison damage and dazing (save ends). If someone closes to melee, it can
**bite** to deal physical damage and inflict ongoing poison damage.

If an attack hits the spitter, it can flare its **Cobra Hood** as a reaction to
gain +4 to AC for a turn.

### Yuan-ti Malison Blessed

An epic priest of Zehir, receiving blessings directly from the deity. It's a
Level 28 Controller (Leader) with 250 HP.

Most of the blessed's controllery effects are passive and always on. It projects
an aura (3) of **Zehir's Favor** that allows allies inside to reroll failed
recharge rolls. It also projects an aura (5) of **Zehir's Agony** that deals 15
poison damage to any enemy starting their turn inside. While bloodied, the
blessed can **Slither Away**, gaining a +2 bonus to speed and a +5 to all
defenses.

The blessed's active actions are few, but powerful. It fights with a
**scimitar** whose strikes damage, strip poison resistance, and inflict a -2
penalty to saves vs. poison effects (save ends both). And yes, about 90% of all
attacks described in this MM3 entry are poison effects. Including this one.

The blessed can also use **Zehir's Command** as a minor action, allowing two
allies within 5 squares to either make a basic attack or shift their speed as a
free action. If an enemy within 5 squares shifts, the blessed can use **Shifting
Feet** as a reaction to slide them 2 squares.

While these creatures are technically regulars, they have the action efficiency
you'd expect from an elite.

### Yuan-ti Malison Assassin

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-yuan-ti-assassin.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This one has a sword and it very much wants to stab you with it so you can
sample the many substances it put on the blade. It's sent after people who anger
Zehir directly. It's a Level 28 Lurker with 194 HP.

The assassin's basic **Longsword** deals very light damage and blinds for a turn
on a hit. A victim who cannot see the assassin for any reason is subject to a
**Death Strike** that deals standard physical damage, inflicts ongoing 15 poison
damage, and imposes a -2 penalty to saves (save ends both). After the first
failed save, the damage worsens by 5 and the save penalty by 1. Someone also
targetted by the Blessed could be looking at a total -5 save penalty here!

If a ranged or melee attack hits the assassin it can use **Shield of Zehir** to
make sure a blind victim adjacent to it also suffers the attack's damage.

### Yuan-ti Malison Stalker

A relentless pursuer sent after victims who steal from Zehir's temples or commit
other crimes against the yuan-ti people. They're Level 28 Skirmishers wtih 254
HP. They're more or less equivalen to PC avengers.

Stalkers use **greataxes** and have 5e advantage on their attacks if the target
is the only creature adjacent to them. They can also teleport 3 squares as a
minor action, which means they can move up to 13 squares a turn without spending
their standard action, and they can charge someone from 20 squares away. It's
impossible to outrun a stalker.

### Molt of Zehir

Literally a person-shaped bag of snakes, made from the cast-off skin of a
yuan-ti. This apparently _just happens_ when an epic yuan-ti molts, it's not a
conscious ritual or anything. The snakes just appear from somewhere and crawl
inside the skin.

Molts are Level 26 Minion Skirmishers. They have a basic **bite** attack and
when they die the dispersing **Horde of Snakes** acts as a Close Burst 1 attack
that damages and inflicts ongoing poison damage (save ends).

## Final Impressions

I'm not overly fond of classic yuan-ti lore these days, because it has too
strong a whiff of "yellow peril" about it. I'd probably come up with something
different for them if I had to.

Mechanically, these creatures are kind of interesting, though each one is very
simple. Mechanically, I think you can knock 10 or even 20 levels off them if you
don't want your PCs to wait until the campaign's endgame to fight the snek
people.


[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2021/02/27/yuan-ti.html" | relative_url }}
