---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Moster Manual 2: Vine, Predatory"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-vine-predatory.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

That's the actual title of the entry, so we have another case of Old School
Titling here. Dangerous plants have been a part of the game since its
beginnings, and I bet a lot of the individual monsters collected in this entry
appeared before in some form or another.

Lore-wise, there isn't much on these other than "they exist". They don't have
strange magical origins like some of the other plant creatures we saw before,
they're just ambulatory carnivorous plants with enough strength and mobility to
hunt people. D&D worlds are already filled with impossibly lethal predators, so
it's not such a stretch to say some of those are plants.

All of the monsters in this entry are Beasts, which in rules terms means they
behave like "animals" rather than like people. They also have the Plant keyword
(obviously). Their Int score is 2, so their behaviors are all
instinctive. Everything else varies per stat block.

## Ambush Vine

The apex predator of the plant kingdom, ambush vines can hunt anywhere: on the
surface, underground, and even in water. Wherever they are, they're always
hunting, and using the tasty nutrients of their victims to fuel their explosive
growth rate. Ambush vines can form blights so vast they threaten civilization,
and its rumored that this contributed to the fall of the old eladrin empire of
Cendriane.

As their name implies, ambush vines are a lot more cunning than your average
plant. They can burrow just under the surface or blend into the surrounding
normal vegetation to wait for victims, and then launch surprise attacks against
them.

Ambush Vines are Large Fey plants, and Level 16 Elite Controllers with 308
HP. They have tremorsense 20, and nothing in their stat block says they're blind
so I guess they can see as well even without eyes. Their speed is 6 in almost
any mode of movement other than flight. They can move over the ground with
Forest Walk, climb, burrow and swim.

A vine's most basic attack is a Reach 2 **Poison Lash** that targets Reflex,
deals physical damage, and inflicts ongoing poison damage. It can also attack
with **Lashing Vines** in a Close Burst 4 pattern, which does more damage than
the basic attack. It's also super-effective against immobilized targets, dealing
extra damage and healing the vine for 5 HP. As a minor action, the vine can use
a Reach 4 **Foot Snare** to deal the same damage as the basic attack and knock a
target prone.

Though ambush vines deal extra damage to immobilized foes, they can't do the
immobilizing themselves, so they must be paired with other monsters capable of
it. Fortunately, they can make their own!

When the vine is first bloodied, it undergoes **Rapid Growth** as an emergency
response, producing two Ambush Vine Shoot minions (see below). It can also make
a minion voluntarily using **Sprout Vine**, a minor action which costs 10 of its
own HP and produces a single minion.

## Ambush Vine Shoot

This is the juvenile form of the ambush vine. It's a Medium Fey plant, and a
Level 15 Minion Controller. Their senses are the same as those of an adult
specimen, though their only special movement mode is burrowing.

These minions have a single attack, **Wrapping Vines**, which deals minion-tier
damage and restrains (save ends). "Restrained" is one step worse than
"immobilized": it roots the victim in place and inflicts a -2 penalty to
attacks. A restrained target also counts as immobilized, so the shoot's "parent"
vine can deal extra damage against them.

The shoot also has a passive trait named **Enwrap**, which affects adjacent
enemies and inflicts a -2 penalty to their saves against being immobilized or
restrained.

## Bloodthorn Vine

This is a vine with pale leaves and one single large thorn. It feeds by impaling
victims on that thorn, which is hollow and capable of draining blood. As it does
so, the vine's leaves take on a reddish coloration.

Bloodthorn vines are Medium Natural plants, and Level 2 Soldiers with 41 HP. By
the logic I've been using, them being low-level means they might occur near the
archetypical Starting Village. This means they're one more threat common
civilians must be wary of in their daily lives, along with stirges, anhkegs, and
giant ants. Bloodthorns are much less lively than Ambush Vines, having only a
ground speed of 5 with Forest Walk and no special movement modes. They have
Blindsight 10 but again are not blind themselves.

Their basic attack is a **Striking Vine** with no riders on its physical
damage. The real danger here is the **Impaling Thorn**, which does the same
damage and grabs the target. The vine can sustain the grab with a standard
action to deal heavy automatic damage to the victim and heal 5 HP. It can use
**Pulling Vines** as a minor action to shift 1 square and pull a grabbed victim
along with it.

Fortunately, the bloodthorn vine can only impale a single victim at a
time... but you _can_ have multiple bloodtorn vines on the same encounter group.

## Greenvise Vine

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-vine-greenvise.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

So named because "Piranha Plant" is already taken. This is a Large Natural
plant, and a Level 7 Soldier with 83 HP. Its speed is only 4, so it relies on
grabbing targets to prevent them from running away.

The greenvise's basic attack is a **Striking Vine**, and they can also use an
**Ensnaring Vine** vs. Reflex to do the same damage and grab the target. That's
when the big chomper comes into play: **Vise Bite** targets a grabbed victim's
Fortitude, deals a bit of initial damage, restrains, and inflicts ongoing
physical damage. A save ends both the restrained condition and the ongoing
damage _but does not end the grab_. You have to escape from that using the
default rules.

The Greenvise also has the same Pulling Vines trait as the Bloodthorn.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

I actually have an easier time distinguishing between killer plants when I see
them all together than when I see them in separate entries over multiple books.

We have three encounters here:

- Level 2: 3 bloodthorn vines and 3 stirges. Probably competing to see who can
  drain the party dry first.

- Level 9: 2 greenvise vines, 1 spectral panther, 3 quickling runners. The
  quicklings and the panther can be used to herd the party towards the
  slow-moving plants.

- Level 17: 1 ambush vine, 1 lingerer fell incanter, 1 lingerer fell
  knight. Sinister vestiges of lost Cendriane.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
