---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Jackalwere"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-jackalwere.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

I believe jackalweres are another monster from the AD&D days, but this time
around they get a new backstory.

## The Lore

The middle world was a ver dangerous place back during the Dawn War. Its lands
were constantly ravaged by splash damage and near-misses from the cosmic
struggle between gods and primordials. It was not unusual for ancient mortals to
go to war with each other and with the wildlife to secure shelter and food.

One of these wars was between an ancient human people and a nation of primal
jackals - sapient magical beasts that looked like mundane animals. The jackals
lost badly and were almost driven to extinction. The few survivors howled their
rage and grief to the skies, and to their surprise something answered. The
primal spirit known as the Dark Sister hear their cries and gave them her gifts,
turning them into the first jackalweres. These gifts give jackalweres the
ability to assume human form. Not a single specific human form, like a
lycanthrope, but _any_ human form, like a doppelganger.

Present-day jackalweres organize themselves into small nomadic packs. Some roam
and hunt like their distant ancestors did, staying mostly in their natural
animal form. Many of them, however, still carry those ancestors' grudges against
humanity and treat them as prey. They use their shapechanging powers to spy on
human communities at the edge of the wilderness and to disable their defenses
before launching a devastating raid with the goal of killing everyone. And once
someone comes in to investigate the carnage it's not uncommon for them to find a
party of "adventurers" doing the same. These adventurers are, of course, the
jackalweres who were responsible for the raid and who stuck around to kill the
responders.

## The Numbers

Jackalweres are Medium Natural Humanoids with the Shapechanger keyword. Their
signature ability is **Change Shape**, which allows them to take the form of a
Medium jackal or that of a human. Their clothing, armor, and possessions do not
change, which means they must either have stashes of gear to don after taking
human form, or they must take someone's place. They can disguise themselves as
any individual they've seen before, and the DC for seeing through this is 26 -
very high for their level.

Jackalweres have Speed 6, the same as a human.

### Jackalwere Bravo

Bravos are the younger members of a pack. They're eager to prove themselves in
battle, but their elders have them acting as servants and menial laborers most
of the time. When they're given orders to fight, they do so with enthusiasm and
release all of their pent-up anger.

Bravos are Level 3 Brutes with 56 HP. The **Bravo's Fury** trait gives them 1d6
bonus damage against dazed, helpless, or prone creatures. In human form, they
fight with **Falchions**, which are High-Crit weapons. In jackal form, they
**bite**, which does a bit less damage but knocks prone on a hit. Their
**Howling Frenzy** attack allows them to bite twice. If both bites hit the same
target, that target is dazed for a turn. This recharges once they're first
bloodied.

When the PCs fight a pack of bravos, it's interesting to mix up their
forms. They can knock PCs prone or daze them while in jackal form, and their
human-form buddies can benefit from this while using the stronger falchion
attack.

### Jackalwere Harriers

Harriers are Level 3 Minion Soldiers with no patience for subtlety. Maybe
they're even younger and more eager members of the pack, or maybe they're
previously wounded warriors forced to fight. Whatever the case, they'll try to
knock their enemies down so their stronger buddies can finish the job.

Harriers fight with **daggers** in human form and with **bites** in jackal
form. The bite is a normal minion attack, and the dagger does a bit less damage
and makes the target grant combat advantage for a turn. In either form, if the
harrier hits someone who's granting combat advantage, they knock the target
prone.

### Jackalwere Deceiver

This is an experience pack leader that has developed some minor magical
powers. They often run some sort of operation that allows them to kill human
victims discreetly. Deceivers are Level 4 Controllers wtih 54 HP.

They fight with **bites** or **short swords** depending on their form, and as
usual the bite knocks prone. In jackal form they can also use a **Vicious Howl**
that attacks a Close Blast 3, does thunder damage, and knocks prone on a hit. In
either form they can use a **Gaze of Sleep** (recharge 5+) that does no damage
and causes the target to fall unconscious (save ends). If the unconscious target
takes damage, they get an additional save against the effect.

Deceivers usually lead a band of bravos and harriers, which means they have an
incentive to lean on Vicious Howl and Gaze of Sleep to allow their hench-jackals
to deal bonus damage against the PCs.

## Final Impressions

These monsters are not technically lycanthropes despite their shapechanging
ability, and this is something I only really got after reading their stat
blocks.

According to the book, the typical jackalwere pack consists of a mated pair of
deceivers leading a mixed band of bravos and harriers. If the pack is currently
in disguise, they'll hire mercenaries to provide additional protection and
firepower. They prefer to hire half-orcs, goliaths and warforged for these jobs
since they dislike the flesh of these species. This implies they find everyone
else tasty.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
