---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Giant, Fire
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-giant-fire.png" | absolute_url }}" width=800/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Like the ghouls we just covered, fire giants are classic monsters that appeared
both in the original Monster Manual, and who would appear again in the upcoming
Monster Vault. The MM3 gives a selection of fire giant stat blocks that
complements that of the MV.

## The Lore

The lore for fire giants remains pretty much the same as it was [in the
MM/MV][2]. The new bits here add that the ancient fire giant empire had close
contact with the efreets of the Elemental chaos, and that their many volcano
fortresses were linked to each other and to the City of Brass via teleportation
circles and portals. Most of these portals are deactivated in the present day,
though the giants labor to reignite them wherever they find one.

As usual, fire giants love to team up with other fire creatures, preferrably
ones they can dominate and command. Some of them end up in the service of more
powerful masters like efreets or the older red dragons, but since fire giants
always think they should be the ones in charge they make for untrustworthy
subordinates.

## The Monsters

Fire Giants are Large Elemental Humanoids with the Giant keyword. They have a
ground speed of 8 and Resist 15 Fire.

### Fire Giant Lavamaster

Here's a name that looks like it came from the writer's 8-year-old
child. Lavamasters are... masters of lava! Their magic allows them to control
magma and use it both as a weapon, and to heal their allies. Lavamasters are
Level 17 Controllers with 164 HP and the Leader tag.

They project an aura (2) of **Hearthflames** that hurts enemies and bolsters
allies. Enemies caught inside take 10 fire damage; bloodied allies recover 10 HP
when they start their turns inside the aura. This is not any kind of "drain"
effect. Allies recover HP regardless of whether there are enemies to damage or
not.

The lavamaster attacks with a **Molten Sword** that deals fire damage, and can
also use several spells. **Magma Lash** is a ranged attack that deals a bit more
fire damage than the sword, and pulls the target 4 squares. If the target ends
up adjacent to the lavamaster, the giant grabs them. The spell recharges when
the giant has no target grabbed. **Magma Burst** is like an at-will
mini-fireball that leaves a fiery zone in its affected area. The zone lasts for
a turn, counts as difficult terrain, and deals fire damage to enemies inside.

If the lavamaster has an enemy grabbed, **Fiery Vendetta** allows the lavamaster
itself or one of its allies to make a free attack against that enemy whenever
the enemy attacks the lavamaster.

A good tactic here is to keep away and repeatedly fireball the enemy, grabbing
anyone who gets too close. Keep a Brute or two nearby as bodyguards so they can
make free attacks against the grabbed victim and benefit from that healing aura.

### Fire Giant Flamedancer

This martial artist is trained in an ancient style developed by the efreets. It
combines mobile spear fighting with fire-based teleportation magic. Flamedancers
are Level 18 Skirmishers with 174 HP.

Their **Nimble Reaction** trait gives them +4 to AC vs. Opportunity Attacks, and
their **Whirling Spear** basic attack deals fire damage and allows them to shift
2 squares on a hit. They can also make at-will **double attacks**, which must be
against different targets.

Once per encounter they can make a **Flameburst Leap** as a move action,
teleporting 8 squares and dealing automatic fire damage to any enemies adjacent
to them at the starting point.

You wouldn't expect a giant to be this agile! The same stat block can be used
for a slightly lower-level efreet without much issue.

### Fire Giant Smokecaller

Smokecallers are what passes for a "subtle" fire giant spellcaster. They
surround themselves in clouds of volcanic smoke, and attack by turning that
smoke into a pyroclastic cloud aimed at their enemies. It's "subtle" without
necessarily being "stealthy", unless you're already in an environment naturally
choked with sulphurous smoke. Which is... actually a common situation when
you're fighting fire giants.

Smokecallers are Level 19 Lurkers with 140 HP and a nice speed of 10. They fight
with a **Smoldering Whip** that has a fantastic reach of 5. It targets Reflex,
does fire damage, and pulls up to 3 squares on a hit.

Its main tactic consists of two abilities: **Smokecloud** creates a zone of
smoke in a Close Burst 3 that lasts for a turn. It blocks line of sight for all
creatures except the smokecaller. While inside this zone, the smokecaller can
use **Cindersmoke** to attack all enemies in a Close Blast 5. This deals fire
damage on a hit, and it ends the smokecloud immediately.

Both are standard actions, which means the lurkery routine here is Smokecloud
followed by Cindersmoke on the next turn. Cindersmoke does the same damage as a
whip attack to each target. This means the whip is only worth it if its forced
movement component would synergize with something. An example is when you have
multiple smokecallers and one of them wants to pull a PC into its buddy's
upcoming Cindersmoke area.

## Final Impressions

Like the ghoul entry, this one feels like it was designed to fit together with
the (upcoming, at the time) Monster Vault. The giants here all use the same
improved math as the ones that would appear on the MV, and they fill roles which
the more "classic" MV lineup does not. Combining the two gives you enough
ready-made stat blocks to make a dungeon inhabited solely by fire giants, though
you might also want to sprinkle in some hell hounds, elementals, and enslaved
azer that just need that final push to revolt.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm3-4e" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2020/04/06/fire-giants.html" | relative_url }}
