---
layout: post
title: "Star Wars RPGs and The Force: A Thought"
tags:
    - gurps
    - opinion
    - star-wars
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/Princess-Leia-Shirt.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    <a href="http://www.heruniverse.com/product/star-wars-princess-leia-self-rescuing-princess-t-shirt/10920417.html">
     Image source.
    </a>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This isn't part of a series or anything, but it's a random though I've been
having and I feel it's worth turning into a post.

## The Thought

If I ever to a Star Wars adaptation, it's going to be one where everybody is
Force-sensitive. Let's do away with the absolutist "magic/no-magic" divide
inspired by D&D that all the official RPGs so far have used. If the Force is
described in the source material as being in everyone, then it should _be_ in in
everyone.

Players would not be forced to play Jedi - rather, the badassitude of their PCs
would be explained by their connection to the Force. No more of that nonsense
about how "you can still be cool even though you're blind to the Force". No,
you're cool because you opened yourself to it. It's everywhere, and getting past
a certain threshold of skill at any endeavor means becoming attuned to the
Force. By definition, any character who is PC material in the sort of heroic
story Star Wars favors is past that threshold.

Like, yeah, you can still be a Jedi who throws stuff around telekinetically and
parries blaster bolts with a lightsaber, but you can also be an amazing
gunfighter from the slums of Coruscant who can _dodge_ blasters, react to stuff
before it happens, and make shots that ricochet from five different surfaces
before hitting some impossibly small target. And maybe both of you can jump
really high because that's always useful.

There's a set of Force-based mechanics that all PCs gets access to, even if they
have the least mystical background possible. They can use it to perform
impossible feats of skill and luck. They can have intuitions and
premonitions. Maybe they can study a mystical tradition to do more overtly
supernatural stuff, but that's not required.

And maybe one of the reasons the Dark Side and the Empire are evil is that
they're the ones who believe that only a select few elites should be given
access to the Force.
