---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Wood Woad"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I think I remember seeing mention of Wood Woads in AD&D somewhere, but I
couldn't find them in my books. This is their 4e debut.

## The Lore

Wood Woads are fey creatures distantly related to dryads. Like dryads, they
devoutly protect the natural environment of their home region. Unlike dryads,
they all look male and have absolutely zero chill.

Not only do wood woads attack would-be despoilers of nature with murderous
intent, they tend to blame each new intruder for the crimes of all the previous
ones. So even if you're careful with the environment and try to approach them
peacefully, they'll still try to kill you because some fool cut a tree down
years ago and managed to run away.

Wood woads tend to ally with other sworn protectors of nature, like dryads,
centaurs and some elves or other fey. So I guess you could still deal with them
peacefully if you manage to approach those allies first and get them to vouch
for you, or have them act as intermediaries.

## The Numbers

We get a single Wood Woad stat block. It's a Medium Fey Humanoid with the Plant
keyword, and a Level 8 Soldier with 92 HP. It has trained Perception, and a
ground speed of 5.

Wood Woads wield wooden shields and clubs. Their basic attack is the **club**,
which does average damage and has no special effects. They can channel magic
through it to inflict **Nature's Judgment** (recharge 6+, Reliable) on a
target. This is an attack that does more damage than the basic club,
immobilizes, and inflicts ongoing physical damage on the target. When the target
takes this ongoing damage, the closest fey or plant ally of the wood woad heals
the same amount of HP.

The Reliable keyword means this power isn't used up if the attack misses. The
wood woad can keep trying to use it until it hits someone, and only them will it
need to make recharge rolls. This attack becomes more useful if all of the wood
woad's allies are either plants or fey.

Once per encounter it can also curse someone with **Nature's Mystery** as a
minor action. This inflicts a -2 penalty on all of the target's attacks,
defenses, and saves. The save to end this effect has an _additional_ -5 penalty
unless the target can succeed at a DC 20 Nature check before rolling it. Guess
this spell has a loophole somewhere.

This is different from the sphinx ability we saw earlier in this Let's Read,
because no one else can make the Nature test in the target's place. This makes
Nature's Mystery an excellent ability to use on most defenders, since they tend
to have low-to-middling Wisdom and no training in Nature. Wardens are the big
exception to this.

Targets affected by this Nature's Mystery are also prime targets for Nature's
Judgment. Make sure to surround them with plant and fey monsters after they get
hit.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We get two sample encounters:

- Level 8: Two dryads, two vine horror spellfiends, 2 wood woads. Did the vine
  horror manage to convince the fey it's part of the local natural environment?

- Level 9: 1 Gnome Entropist, 1 Satyr Piper, 1 Shambling Mound, 3 Wood Woads. I
  guess the gnome is a actually a druid using the entropist stat block.

I like the feel of the mechanics on this one, but the lore is once again a bit
uninspiring. It's another humanoid fey plant that's fanatical about protecting
nature, just like dryads and treants. I guess they can round out the cast when
you want to focus a game on a faction of such beings, but we already have a lot
of other possible creatures that belong there as well (satyrs, centaurs, elven
druids, and so on).

If you want to use the wood woad stat block but don't want to say they're a
completely separate species, just say they're small treants instead.
