---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Boggle"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-boggle-body.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Boggles have been in the game since 1st Edition, when they appeared on the
Monster Manual II. This is their 4e debut.

## The Lore

Boggles are mischievous humanoid fey. They've been around a very long time, and
are actually the common ancestors to both banderhobbs and mundane goblins! They
love playing cruel pranks on others, and move from the Feywild to the world
every time they find a fey crossing. The world's mortals are so much more easily
fooled than the jaded fey of their home plane!

These creatures are naturally sneaky and have some capacity to bend space. It's
common for a child to complain to their parents about a "bogeyman" who keeps
lurking just out of sight and disappears when looked at. Parents dismiss that as
a childhood fantasy right up until the boggle strikes. Common pranks include
spoiling milk, tying shoelaces together, setting clothes on fire, and all the
stuff you might have read in old real-world myths about the Fair Folk. At the
most cruel end that does include switching infants for swaddled animals or just
plain snatching children away. There are also some adventurer-specific pranks
like disassembling armor and hiding the pieces, or swapping brand new or magic
weapons for old and rusty replacements.

For all their cruelty, boggles are cowards, preferring to do their spying and
sabotage through those mini-portals they can create. They get nervous and
anxious when near other people, and this causes them to sweat profusely. Boggle
sweat is a very distinctive substance, viscous and slippery like grease. It's
resistant to fire, though. Traces of it are often confirmation that boggles are
acting in a location.

Sometimes, stronger or smarter creatures manage to coerce boggles into working
for them. Left to their own devices, they associate only with each other.

## The Numbers

Boggles are an early-Heroic threat suitable for introducing PCs to the more
fairy-tale side of fey opposition. They're Small Fey Humanoids with ground and
climb speeds of 6, and darkvision. They also have Fire Resistance 5 from their
weird sweat.

Their signature traits are **Dimensional Window**, which allows them to make
"remote" Thievery checks against creatures up to 10 squares away; and
**Dimension Hop**, a move action that lets them teleport up to 3 squares. Even
tough they're small, boggles have a long melee reach, because they hit you
through a tiny portal. All of their individual powers are also based around this
ability to create small dimensional windows.

### Boggle Sight Stealer

This is a Level 3 Lurker with 37 HP. Its basic attack is a Reach 2 **claw**, and
its favorite move is the **Peek-a-Boo Trick** a Range 10 attack that targets
Reflex. It does no damage, but it lets the boggle pull the target to a space
within 2 squares of it and to grab them. The target is blinded until the grab
ends, either by the target beating its escape DC of 13, or by the boggle being
more than 2 squares away from the target.

While the boggle is grabbing a victim, it can use a **Neck Bite** on them. This
attacks Reflex and deals heavy physical damage, half on a miss. If the victim
escapes the grab, the boggle can attack it with **Face Rip** as a reaction,
automatically dealing a bit of physical damage and allowing the boggle to
teleport 3 squares.

Sight Stealers work very well against controllers and ranged strikers,
particularly if they have buddies that can keep the other PCs away from them.

### Boggle Blink Trickster

Blink Tricksters are Level 4 Artillery with 43 HP. They're the only artillery
monster I've seen that lacks a ranged attack! Instead, their basic **claw** has
a, well, boggling Reach of _10_, and enjoys the increased accuracy usually given
to ranged attacks from artillery monsters. This is an interesting implementation
because it means they're not actually weak in melee and need not fear
opportunity attacks as much.

In addition to the standard traits discussed above, blink tricksters can use a
**Double Diversion Trick** to attack twice in one action. This recharges when
they're first bloodied. And if they're damaged by a melee attack, they can
dimension hop as a reaction once per encounter.

### Boggle Chase Trickster

Chase tricksters are Level 4 Skirmishers with 53 HP. Their **claws** have a more
typical reach of 2, and they have a couple of interesting movement powers.

**Foot-Snare Trick** is a minor action that can target an enemy flanked by the
boggle. It has an automatic effect: if the target moves more than 3 squares on
their next turn, they end that movement prone. This won't do much good against
defenders, but it can ruin the plans of mobile strikers.

**Chase Trick** is a reaction that triggers when the boggle is missed by a melee
attack. It can shift up to 3 squares and pull the attacker along with it. This
represents the creature tricking the attacker into chasing them, so the pull
does provoke opportunity attacks! If the attacker ends this movement without
taking damage, they can make a free attack against the boggle. The power
recharges when the boggle is first bloodied. It's only worth using if the boggle
has plenty of other buddles hanging out nearby.

### Boggle Body Snatcher

This is a Level 5 Controller with 61 HP. It has all standard boggle traits
including a Reach 2 **claw** attack. Its special move is **Body Snatch**
(recharge 4+). It's a non-damaging attacks that dominates on a hit (save ends)!
Until the target saves against this, the boggle is removed from play, and the
target gains a +2 bonus to hit and damage. When the effect ends the boggle
returns to play within 5 squares of the target.

In other words, this thing works exactly like a Jockey from Left 4 Dead 2,
riding the victim and directing their movement. It's also extra-sweaty: once per
round as a minor action it can leave a **Boggle Sweat Stain** on the
ground. Each stain occupies a square and lasts until the end of the
encounter. Whenever a non-boggle enters a sweat-stained square, they
automatically fall prone.

## Final Impressions

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-boggle-hand.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

I like these creatures! Their lore gives them a proper fairy-tale monster feel,
and their mechanics are flavorful and interesting. My favorite is the Reach 10
melee attack from the blink trickster, with the body snatcher's sweat stains
a close second.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
