---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Ashmadai Encounters"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

The enemy table for the Ashmadai includes Heroic-tier devils and cambions from
several books, and also several humanoid opponents that could be reskinned as
cultists. We also get a few new stat blocks for cultists and devils, and for the
cult's leaders.

## Seared Devil

Looking like a stinky burned corpse, this devil hurls itself at its victims,
driven by envy of their uncooked state. It's a Level 3 Soldier with 50 HP, speed
5, and Resist 10 Fire. Its basic attack is an **Ashen Slam** that damages and
marks for a turn on a hit. Enemies that ignore the mark are hit by the **Choking
Ashes** power, taking 5 fire damage and getting slowed for a turn.

## Branded Zealot

Those who get initiated into the cult are branded with the symbol of
Asmodeus. Most of them use this stat block. The typical zealot has a frightful
temper and is easily goaded into fights. They're Level 4 Brutes with 66 HP.

Zealots attack in melee with a **Branding Iron** that deals fire damage, and at
range with a Range 3 **Hellfire Chain** spell that deals fire damage, pulls 2
squares, and slows for a turn on a hit.

Their special move is named **Bow to Your Master**, and it lets them do a
Hellfire chain attack followed by a Branding Iron attack if the target is
adjacent to them. It recharges when neither attack hits. If both of them do, the
target falls prone.

## Hellfire Warlock

A more discreet cultist, who got infernal warlock powers from deals with
Asmodeus. They're better at concealing their brands and like to infiltrate enemy
centers to spy and sabotage them. They're Level 4 Artillery with 48 HP.

The warlock's **Hellfire Affinity** gives them +2 to defenses against enemies
who are taking ongoing fire damage. Both of their basic attacks (a **dagger**
for melee and a **Hellfire** bolt for ranged combat) damage and inflict ongoing
fire damage (save ends).

Once per encounter they can release a **Concussive Inferno** in a Close
Burst 2, targeting enemies. On a hit, this deals fire and force damage, pushes
the targets 2 squares, and knocks them prone. On a miss it still deals half
damage and pushes 2 squares.

If a creature within 10 squares of the warlock is taking fire damage, they can
**Ride the Fire** as a move action (recharge 5+) and teleport to swap places
with them.

## Fimbrul Devil

Looks just like a seared devil, but is cold. These things hail from Nessus or
Cania, and it is said that someone who survives a fight with them suffers from
persistent chills for years afterwards. They're Level 5 Controllers with 66 HP,
Speed 6 with Ice Walk, and Resist 10 to both fire and cold damage.

Their **Icy Claws** deal cold damage; their **Icy Exhalation** hits a Close
Blast 3, deals cold damage, and slows for a turn. Targets that were already
slowed are instead immobilized. Once per encounter they can encase a creature in
a **Frozen Prison** as a ranged attack, which deals cold damage and restrains
(save ends). On a miss, the target takes half damage and is immobilized (save
ends).

## Mordai Vell

The pleasant face of the cult, Mordai Vell is a tiefling aristocrat descended
from one of Neverwinter's minor noble clans that was largely unaffected by the
cataclysm. This doesn't give him a claim to the throne, but does leave him with
a lot of inherited wealth. His money and title make him an influent character in
the city's politics, and his public reputation is generally good because he's
almost as charismatic as he thinks he is. He sees Asmodeus not as his master,
but as a means to an end.

In addition to the deals and schemes detailed above, Vell is also dealing with a
duergar named Nimor Ironvoice who claims to have access to a source of
hellthorn, a special metallic alloy that is very easy to enchant with infernal
magic. He has people following Ironvoice around for a while now, but the duergar
is careful enough to avoid revealing his sources.

When faced in combat, Vell is a Level 6 Lurker with 60 HP and Resist 10
Fire. His basic melee attack is with a **rod** that damages and pushes 2
squares, but his special powers are the most interesting part about him.

**Fiery Corona** attacks a Close Burst 2, dealing fire and force damage and
inflicting ongoing fire damage. **Shrouded in Fire** deals 5 automatic fire
damage to everyone adjacent to Mordai and lets him become invisible and teleport
5 squares. He remains invisible until he attacks or until the end of his next
turn. Using one of these powers recharges the other, so he's going to alternate
them if possible.

## Favria

Favria had been enslaved by a far-away band of Asmodeus-worshiping duergar since
her birth. She escaped their service, but kept their faith. She made her way to
Neverwinter to search for Gauntlgrym, joining up with the local cult and rising
to a leadership position mostly through force and intimidation.

If Vell is the pleasant lie, Favria is the harsh reality of Asmodeus
worship. Instead of lies and intrigue, she prefers to deal with problems by the
direct application of violence. Still, she sees value in his way of doing
things, and cooperates by keeping herself and her underlings mostly out of
Neverwinter proper. They have a hideout in the ruins of the village of
Thundertree.

Unlike Vell, Favria knows exactly what the unholy relic of Asmodeus held by the
Thayans is capable of, which is why she is so intent on recovering it. She's
also still looking for Gauntlgrym. She is unaware that it's currently occupied
by Asmodeus-worshiping duergar, and her reaction to that discovery is
unpredictable. Will she readily cooperate with her fellows in faith, or will she
try to kill them to avenge her suffering at the hands of a similar group?

Favria is a Level 5 Skirmisher with 68 HP. She has Resist 5 to fire and poison,
and fights using a pair of custom **bladed hand crossbows** that can be used in
melee or at range. The melee attack deals extra damage if the target grants
combat advantage, and the ranged attack fires **poisoned bolts** that damage and
inflict ongoing poison damage (save ends). **Dual Assault** lets her make one of
each attack once per encounter, recharging if neither hits.

## Impressions

I did say I wasn't inclined to make the Ashmadai a major thread but if I still
wanted them to have a bit of staying power I'd probably tone down Mordai Vell's
personality.

As written, his demeanor is so Trump-like any players here in 2023 will
immediately figure out he's a bad guy and do their best to gank him early. That
might bring some attention from the other factions, but would remove the cult
itself as an effective threat.
