---
layout: post
date: 2023-06-29 08:00:00 -03:00
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: New Neverwinter"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

As mentioned before, Lord Dagult Neverember of Waterdeep has recently arrived in
Neverwinter at the head of a mercenary force with the intent of rebuilding the
city and re-establishing order and trade. He claims descent from one of Nasher
Alagondar's bastard sons, saying this gives him the right to take over the
city. Alagondar was the ruler of Neverwinter at the time depicted in the
computer games.

"New Neverwinter" is a concept Neverember's propaganda machine came up with to
stir nationalistic sentiment among the populace and get them on-side. This, and
the practical results of his rebuilding efforts, have worked on the majority of
the city's residents, but some of them consider the idea of a "new Neverwinter"
to be an insult to the city's memory. Chief among these dissenters are the Sons
of Alagondar, militant rebels who oppose Neverember and have been clashing often
with his forces.

Most of what we've seen so far points to Neverember being a villainous
character, whose claim is fake and whose rule would be selfish and
oppressive. But there's a text box here that reminds us that not even this is
set in stone. Lord Neverember's role in a specific campaign is entirely up to
the GM. His claim might be true or false, his intentions might be altruistic or
selfish, and his rule could end up being good or bad for the region, and all of
these "switches" are independent from each other. Also independent from all of
this is the attitude of the PCs towards him - you still have a meaty campaign
whether they want to support or topple the lord, and there are plenty of other
things to occupy them if they're indifferent.

## Goals

Neverember's main goal is of course to **Claim the Throne**. He is effectively
in charge of that portion of the city his faction controls, but running the city
and wearing its crown are very different things. Neverember's current plan is to
make the people love him. He's going to improve their lives so much that they'll
beg him to become their lord, claim or no claim. Mwa-ha-ha!

Of course, Dagult will still have a much easier time of it if he can **Prove his
Disputed Heritage**. He knows his word is not enough to prove his claim, so he's
been hiring scholars and explorers to look for documents that support it among
the city's ruined archives and libraries. He's also not above hiring those same
scholars to _fabricate_ such documents, and has burned more than one book that
had a less-than-helpful stance on his ancestry.

While seeking the crown, Neverember still has to actually **Run the City**, to
**Maintain His Position** as the Open Lord of Waterdeep, and he also never loses
sight of the whole reason he's doing all of this, which is to **Make Hard
Coin**. In order to juggle all of this, he delegates heavily. General Sabine,
who commands the mercenary army, is in charge of policing and defending the
territory he controls in the city. He appointed a dwarf named Soman Galt to act
as mayor and oversee tax collection, grants of property, and other paperwork.

For the same reason, he loves to **Hire Sellswords** to care care of problems
that require more discreet solutions. This includes looking for proof of his
claims and spying on the opposition as mentioned above, but it also includes
**Finding Gauntlgrym** because having that as a feather on his cap would
increase his chances of being declared king by popular acclaim.

## Player Character Tie-Ins

A PC with the Neverwinter Noble background is Dagult's greatest nightmare:
someone with a stronger claim to the throne of the city. He will either try to
deal with the obstacle by sending mercenaries to spy on or assassinate the
character, or by trying to publicly discredit them once the discreet approach
becomes impossible.

The Harper Agent was also sent here to oppose Neverember, but as the campaign
starts they've just realized nothing is as it seems. Are they proceeding with
their original mission, or deviating from it now that the Harpers' original
intel proved to be woefully incomplete?

PCs with the Oghma's Faithful theme would be eager to take part in any genuine
fact-finding expedition about Dagult's lineage (or that of his
rivals!). However, their devotion is to the truth rather than to any mortal
lord, and the truth they find can end up drawing the ire of either Dagult
himself or his enemies, depending on whether it contradicts or supports his
claim.

Depending on his exact moral disposition in the campaign, Neverember could be
either a potential sponsor or a rival to the Heir of Delzoun in the search for
Gauntlgrym.

PCs without direct connections to this storyline might still find New
Neverwinter a ready source of miscellaneous mercenary jobs when they need some
extra cash and XP. In addition to being the hired swords for the above plots,
they could also bolster the faction's efforts to evict the orcish army that has
taken part of the city ruins, or get hired to investigate the numerous
mysterious events in town that point to the other major factions, like
spellplagued monster attacks or mysterious disappearances.

## Faction Relationships

New Neverwinter has no idea the **Abolethic Sovereignity** is behind those
monster attacks. They're causing these to keep the surfacers distracted while
they carry on their experiments.

The **Ashmadai** managed to secure a tenuous alliance of sorts with New
Neverwinter. Dagult doesn't know who they are beyond "a shady but influential
cult". He uses them as an occasional source of deniable muscle, and they're hard
at work subverting and corrupting his underlings with the goal of eventually
inducting the man himself among their ranks. Their leader, Mordai Veil, is
currently attempting to seduce General Sabine.

He was received a few reports of **Thayans** in the region, and has tasked
General Sabine with finding out more. She has yet to deliver her first report.

Dagult is completely ignorant of **Netherese** operations in the region and has
unwittingly hired Shadovar agents as assassins before.

## Impressions

Even if you decide to make the lord himself something other than a villainous
asshole, there are a lot of events in motion that could lead him and his faction
in that direction. They're heavily infiltrated by both diabolists and abolethic
agents! PCs seeking to support or co-opt New Neverwinter are going to have a
harder job ahead of them than those who try to destroy it. They're also in the
dark about the Thayans and Netherese as the campaign starts, and might be
blindsided by either of them.

I still think Dagult and friends work better as villains, either by themselves
or as an eventual tool of someone worse. Making them neutral or sympathetic
would however be a good way to take New Neverwinter out of consideration if the
party is not interested in tangling with it, making it a part of the background
noise.
