---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Hurly-Burly Brothers"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-hurly-burly-brothers.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

This is such a simple entry, but I really like it.

## The Lore

Once upon a time, many years ago, a powerful troll shaman bore two children,
twin boys. Like any mother, she wanted her children to grow up safe and
protected, so she cast a powerful ritual that bound their spirits together. From
that point on, they could only be killed while in close proximity to each other.

This ended up making the brothers Hurly and Burly even more unkillable than your
typical trolls, because they grew up to hate each other's guts. Staying in close
proximity is the last thing they want to do!

Nowadays, they live in two caves five miles apart, both north of Winterhaven
near the foothills of the Cairngorm Peaks. One of them is close to the shores of
Lake Wintermist, the other is to the west. The book doesn't say which brother
lives where, but as long as you remember your own decision it should be fine.

Hurly and Burly mostly keep to themselves, roaming the area around their
respective caves and hunting the local wildlife. Every once in a while, though,
one of them will end up encroaching on the other's territory, and the two have a
bitter and violent fight that can last for days. The brothers tear each other to
pieces, but this does no lasting harm because they're trolls. It does leave both
of them angry enough to begin taking their frustrations out on surrounding
settlements and passing travelers for a while, which is one possible reasons for
meddlesome PCs to get involved with the two.

Could one of the brothers move further away to end these altercations? Sure! But
neither of them will give "that rotten git" the satisfaction of backing down.

## The Numbers

The brothers are so alike they share the same stat block! They're both Level 9
Elite Brutes with 240 HP and Speed 8. As trolls, they're Large Natural
Humanoids.

Their basic attack uses a troll-sized **battleaxe**, and they can use **Cleave**
to attack all enemies in a Close Burst 2 (that's an area 2 squares on a
side). This does a bit less damage to each target and pushes them 1 square.

The trolls have **Regeneration 10**, which as usual shuts down for a turn if
they take fire or acid damage. Instead of Troll Healing, they have **Bound By
Blood**. As with troll healing, once they drop to 0 HP the brothers get back up
with 30 HP after a turn. To prevent this, they must be hit by an attack that
deals fire or acid damage _while within 5 squares of the other brother_. This
can be either the attack that drops them, or an extra attack made while they're
down, as usual.

The brothers' blessing is _not_ general knowledge, but they of course know all
about it. PCs might discover it by studying the trolls and succeeding at a DC 21
Arcana or Nature check. This could be done through quiet observation, but it
will most likely happen after the first time one of them fails to die to the
usual troll countermeasures.


## Final Impressions

I really like the fairy-tale quality of the brothers' story. Presumably, the
party will end up interacting with them when tasked to resolve their conflict in
a way that stops their periodic rampages.

This could be resolved with murder, of course, even though that's the boring
solution. Regardless of the party's level, they can never hope to defeat one of
the brothers if they meet him alone. He'll just keep getting back up! The PCs
must discover the blessing and find a way to get them together, which could mean
provoking another fight between them. In that case the brothers will try their
best to stay further than 5 squares apart, so PC controllers have their work cut
out for them.

But why restrict ourselves to violence when there are many more fun ways to
handle this? If you spring the brothers on a party that's way too weak to fight
them, the PCs must engage in trickery or diplomacy to convince the pair to move
further apart. Or maybe the actual enemy is some more powerful threat, and the
PCs must somehow enlist the brothers as hired muscle. And it has to be both of
them. So now the controllers will find themselves trying to _prevent_ enemies
from forcing the trolls together.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
