---
layout: post
title: "The Coiled Spring"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - artifact
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/coiled-spring.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
  Image source: <a
  href="https://www.deviantart.com/eveyd/art/Antique-Vintage-Pocket-Watch-png-268108244">EveyD
  on DeviantArt</a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The Coiled Spring is an amulet made of brass. It's disc shaped and about an inch
thick. On its front, there is a relief of a snake eating its own tail, the
classic Ouroboros. The inside of the ring formed by the snake is a clear crystal
panel, through which can be seen a spring like that of a watch.

That spring can store up to ten Fatigue Points which can be used to enable
bursts of extra effort - most often _Extra Effort in Combat_ (p. B357), but also
other athletic feats. The stored FP can only be used for those purposes, and is
not affected by negative effects that would sap the user's own FP. In other
words, it works just like the Heroic Reserves advantage from **GURPS Dungeon
Fantasy 20: Slayers**, and _almost_ like a power item for martial characters.

The main difference between the Coiled Spring and a normal Power Item is that it
hijacks the natural recovery processes of the wearer's body in order to "wind"
itself, and cannot be recharged by the usual methods for power items. While the
Spring is not at full capacity, its wearer is unable to recover their own
Fatigue Points, and the amulet gains 1 FP every 10 minutes. This is a constant
rate - traits which speed up FP recovery for the wearer have no effect on the
amulet. The wearer regains their usual ability to rest when the amulet is fully
charged, or when it's removed (which stops the charging process).

While this does mean recharging the Coiled Spring in town is effectively free,
it can make dungeon delving more complicated for martial characters,
particularly if the GM enforces rules like fatigue costs for fighting a battle
(p. B426 or DF Exploits p. 60). Characters who normally can't use Fatigue Points
can wear the Coiled Spring and use it to benefit from the Extra Effort rules in
and out of combat, though they can't recharge it.

Scholars who know of the Spring speculate that it was originally meant  to allow
golems and other constructs to surpass their limits. In an adventure, it will
most likely be found worn by such a construct, or by an elite warrior who
figured out it works just as well for organics. If found in a chest or hoard,
though, it will always start out empty.

If the delvers try to sell the Coiled Spring, or if you decide it's available in
shops, its monetary value is twice that of a Power Item of the same
capacity. That's $3400 for the 10 FP version described here, though you could
have versions with greater or smaller capacity. Note that you _can't_ double-dip
and use the Coiled Spring as a Power Item.

Variant Springs are possible. Maybe the Flywheel of Faith can power divine
magic, the Arcane Array wizardly spells, and the Goddess Gyre druidic ones. The
recharging mechanics and all other restrictions are the same. They could allow a
construct who can't normally cast spells or use casting magical items due to a
lack of FP to do so.
