---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Shadowmire"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-shadowmire.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Here's our third dragon!

## The Lore

The black dragon Shadowmire has made the Witchlight Fens his home for over two
hundred years. He's the more active and aggressive of the Vale's current
draconic inhabitants, and I guess also the one most like a typical dragon.

Shadowmire claims the entire extent of the Witchlight Fens as his dominion,
but though his personal power is terrifying, his power _base_ is not quite up to
the task of controlling all of that territory. The dragon rules many of the
lizardfolk tribes who live on the area as a terrifying overlord, and while
they're not always capable of preventing others from encroaching into the fens,
Shadowmire uses them to punish any groups foolish enough to do so. He likes to
brag that the fall of Kalton Manor was his greatest victory, though he was not
the sole factor involved in that tragedy.

The dragon's main goal is to turn his claims into reality, and to grow ever
wealthier and more powerful in the process. He patrols the Fens to make its
inhabitants fear him, and can sometimes be seen flying over the Nentir River
where it passes by the swamp. He can also move more stealthily, even swimming
silently where the water is deep enough.

Shadowmire's lair is under the Cairnwater river, accessible through an
underwater entrance at the river bed. Its true location is known only to the
dragon himself, but there's much speculation about it and the treasures it
contains. Shadowmire is entirely aware of this and keeps a number of fake lairs
throughout the fens, which he uses to misdirect his enemies and lure greedy
adventurers to their doom. The dragon increases his hoard by looting those
greedy adventurers, and by raiding trade boats that pass through the Nentir
river.

Since he's lived in the Fens for so long, Shadowmire knows practically every one
of its secrets, and a good deal about the story of the Vale besides. He also
makes some effort to remain aware of the Vale's current affairs through his
network of spies.

Not every inhabitant of the Fens serves the dragon, and some even try to oppose
him. I imagine there might be a hag coven or two who have objections to his
rule, but the group the book calls out as the most persistent torn on
Shadowmire's side are the Daggerburg Goblins! They regularly venture into the
fens and clash with Shadowmire's lizardfolk servants. I imagine they might be in
a true pickle if the dragon decides to retaliate personally, but he doesn't like
leaving the Fens.

## The Numbers

Shadowmire's stats make me think all three dragons were written by different
authors, because he's Huge and a Level 19 Solo Lurker with 712 HP. This makes
him the most powerful dragon in the book, even stronger than slumbering
Calastryx. I guess this is balanced by the fact that he has the weakest army, as
his lizarfolk aren't very organized and can't operate very well outside the
swamp. This limits how far he can expand.


Despite having a level comparable to that of a "stock" Elder Black Dragon,
Shadowmire has a slightly less varied repertoire of attacks. His passive traits
are all work the same, as do his **bite**, **Breath Weapon**, and **Bloodied
Breath**.

Bite and Breath Weapon do less damage than the ones from the base elder
dragon. The difference here is that the Threats writers considered the added
ongoing acid damage from both the bite and the breath to be part of the damage
formula, while the Monster Vault writers added them on top of that. Both bite
and breath do half damage on a miss, too, so a fight against Shadowmire is a
grueling battle of attrition.

Shadowmire's **Claw** attacks do the same damage as a base elder dragon's, and
pull the target 2 squares. His **Tail Sweep** works the same but does more base
damage.

And finally we get to the star of the show, his custom ability: **Swamp
Simulacrum**. When used, this makes Shadowmire turn invisible for a turn and
summons 2 identical duplicates within 10 squares of the original. They last
until the end of the encounter or until destroyed. The duplicates are
effectively minions with Shadowmire's defenses, and explode in a burst of acid
when destroyed (Close Burst 2, acid damage, half on a miss). This recharges when
the dragon is first bloodied.

## Final Impressions

Shadowmire is an interest mechanical variation on an elder black dragon, and his
lore is workable enough, but I think he's a bit too high level to fit with that
lore. I'd probably make him Level 12 or so. He's more dangerous and intelligent
than Bitterstrike, but is not seen as a living calamity like Calastryx.


[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
