---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Gravelstoke Family"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-gravelstoke-family.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

The Gravelstokes are a new threat with very specific ties to the Nentir Vale
setting. They also serve as a reminder that Nerath wasn't all sunshine and
roses.

## The Lore

The Gravelstokes used to be one of the most prominent noble families in old
Nerath. They frequented the highest courts, had the ear of the royal family, and
had holdings spread through all corners of the empire. The time of strife and
backstabbing that followed the fall of Nerath's government saw their fortunes
and household greatly diminished. Despite paying such a heavy cost to end the
family's old rivalries, it managed to keep its deepest and darkest secret: all
of that prestige and money they had during Nerath's heyday came from their
service to the Crown as assassins. One of the reasons they fell was because they
no longer had a benefactor to support their work.

Their patriarch at the time, Lord Andrew Gravelstoke, retired to his last
holdings in the remote Nentir Vale and took most of his surviving relatives with
him. There he eventually passed and left his children to squander the last of
the family fortune. All that remains is their bleak stone mansion in the Barony
of Harkenwold, and a modest summer retreat just outside of Fallcrest.

The current patriarch is Andrew's grandson Xander. After decades of bickering
has managed to unite most of the family behind the singular purpose of
recovering their old prestige and fortune. And they intend to do that by taking
up the old family trade: murdering people.

Xander has been making contact with the family's old business partners, former
rivals, and anyone who is in need of a spot of murder to let them know the
Gravelstokes are once again for hire. They've kept the old family techniques
alive and even improved on them, so the quality of their service is assured.

The family's main field operatives are Xander himself, his three younger
siblings, and his son. Xander also takes counsel from his uncle Barin and his
widowed sister-in-law Lenore. His young wife Regan is attractive, demure, and
knows how to keep a secret, but doesn't have any direct involvement in the
"business". She's Xander's third wife: the first two failed to meet his approval
and suffered convenient accidents.

The siblings are named Mikus, Tovin, and Alesia. Mikus and Tovin are twins, and
the trio is inseparable. They go everywhere together, whether on a job or just
traveling for fun. There are dark rumors floating around about the carnality of
their relationship and its "debased offspring", but in a surprising twist for
such a heavily Gothic Horror family, these rumors are all false. They are
however competent and ruthless assassins.

Xander's son Vincent is more of a serial killer than an assassin, an anti-social
recluse who is very particular about whom he chooses to kill. Xander is at a bit
of a loss about what to do with him, since this behavior is bad for business.

## The Numbers

We get stats for all combatant Gravelstokes here. They're all early to
mid-Paragon threats, which likely means their customers are the kind of people
who have designs on the whole of the Vale.

The Gravelstokes' special training gives them several advantages over typical
humans. They all have Darkvision, and they all know their signature technique
named **Stone Cold Killer**.

Any creature killed by a Gravelstoke-trained assassin is petrified and cannot be
raised from the dead while they remain that way. The killer can end this
petrification by touching the victim and willing them restored, or someone else
can do it by sprinkling a few drops of the killer's blood on the statue. A
restored victim is still dead, of course, but now they can be returned to life
with a Raise Dead ritual.

### Vincent Gravelstoke

Vincent's tactics in a fight mirror his social behavior: he lurks at the edges
and only steps in when a good opportunity for murder presents itself. He's a
Level 12 Lurker with 90 HP. His **Poisoned Rapier** does necrotic and poison
damage, and if the attack is made with combat advantage it also inflicts 10
ongoing damage (save ends).

He can also perform a **Shadow Strike**, a standard action which removes him
from play until the start of his next turn. At that time, he reappears within 10
squares of his previous position and can perform a rapier attack that deals
heavy physical damage and prevents the target from spending healing surges (save
ends). It does half damage on a miss.

If pressed, Vincent can **Fade Into the Shadows** as a minor action. This
encounter power makes him insubstantial and grants partial concealment until the
start of his next turn. The effect ends early if he attacks, or if he suffers
radiant damage.

Finally, Vincent's fencing skill lets him **Parry** melee attacks as an at-will
interrupt that grants him +4 to all defenses against the attack.

### Tovin Gravelstoke

One of the twins, Tovin is a deadly sniper. He's Level 13 Artillery with 96
HP. He wields a **Crossbow of Dread** whose basic attacks grant him a +4 damage
bonus against the target until the end of his next turn. Some of his bolts are
**Poisoned Shot** (recharge 5+), doing the same damage as the basic attack and
inflicting 10 ongoing necrotic and poison damage (save ends). The target also
becomes immobilized after the first failed save, and after the second both
effects are replaced with unconsciousness (save ends).

If hit in melee, Tovin can use **Shadow Escape** (encounter) as a reaction to
deal 5 necrotic damage to the attacker and teleport 5 squares. If he can't
escape, he'll fight with his **Dagger of Death**, whose attacks deal necrotic
damage.

### Mikus Gravelstoke

The other twin is much more fond of melee combat. He's a Level 13 Soldier with
128 HP. His **greatsword** deals physical damage and marks for a turn. If a
marked enemy within 5 squares of Mikus makes an attack that doesn't include him
as a target, he can use **Shadow's Curse** to deal an automatic 10 necrotic
damage to them, ignoring all resistances and immunities.

He can also use a spell named **Incite The Blood**, a selective Close Burst 3
that pulls targets 2 squares towards him and lets him make a strong melee attack
against each one. In other words, it's a goth version of Come and Get It.

### Alesia Gravelstoke

Alesia is a bit older than the twins, but is still their steadfast sister and
friend. She's a Level 14 Controller with 140 HP. Her weapon of choice is a
**Bewildering Chakram** that can be used for both melee and ranged attacks. An
enemy hit by either takes 5 extra psychic damage for each square they move
during their next turn. When used as a thrown weapon, the chakram returns to
Alesia's hand after the attack.

She can also perform a **Reeling Chakram** attack (recharges when first
bloodied). This does about double damage, half on a miss, and also pushes the
target 2 squares and knocks them prone as an effect. Plus she knows enough magic
to cast a **Toxic Tendrils** spell (Area 2 within 10, recharge 5+), which deals
necrotic and poison damage and slows (save ends).

### Xander Gravelstoke

The patriarch of the family, and its most deadly combatant. Xander is a Level 16
Elite Skirmisher with the Leader tag and 304 HP. He wields paired short swords
in a fight. The basic **sword** attack deals physical damage and slides the
target 1 square. Xander can also **Lunge** (recharge 5+) which lets him shift up
to half his speed before the attack and deals increased damage. Both attacks
ignore 10 points of resistance, which is only likely to come up against targets
that have Resist All since what I call "physical" damage is actually untyped.

Once per encounter Xander can use a **Shadow Step** to teleport 5 squares and
gain partial concealment for a turn.

Xander's minor actions are where his Leaderly and Elite-y maneuvers
are. **Off-Hand Swipe** lets him shift 2 squares and then make a sword attack
that deals slightly less damage than a basic one. Combining this with the basic
attack lets Xander efficiently herd PCs. Once per encounter he can use **Quick
Rally** to affect all allies within 3 squares. Affected allies can shift 2
squares and make a melee basic attack, though each of them must attack a
different creature.

## Final Impressions

Like the Barrowhaunts, the Gravelstokes are a party of Evil NPCs that pair very
well with each other. Having one of the PCs' enemies hire them to kill the PCs
is the most obvious way to include them in the adventure, though there are other
ways that can be as or more fun.

You might, for example, add them to your campaign much earlier, still in the
early Heroic Tier, as a source of ominous foreshadowing. They do have a summer
estate in Fallcrest where they can go to pose as slightly eccentric nobles while
Xander and Uncle Barin negotiate new contracts. It's also possible to have a
Heroic Tier murder mystery where the victim turned to stone after death. The PCs
might not be able to determine the identity of the actual killer beyond "a
mysterious hired assassin", and then the goal becomes finding the mastermind.

The family is not really interested in Nerath as an ideal - they care only about
regaining their own prestige and wealth. That could happen in a reborn Nerath,
or it could happen in an empire by any other name. So they might consider any of
the "revivalist" factions as prospective clients or as deluded upstarts
depending on how deep their purses are.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
