---
layout: post
date: 2023-10-25 16:00:00 -03:00
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Evernight, part 02"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
    - dnd4
---

This post concerns itself with specific landmarks in Evernight. A lot of them
are "coterminous" with Neverwinter landmarks, occupying the corresponding
location in space and having the exact same boundaries.


## Black Mound

The district of **Black Mound** is named that because of the hill that dominates
it. It's coterminous with the Protector's Enclave in Neverwinter. The houses and
manors here are larger than in the rest of Evernight, but just as
dilapidated. Undead are not known for their tidiness.

Most of the city's relevant landmarks are here.

### House of Screams

Located in the same spot as Neverwinter's Hall of Justice, the House of Screams
is the oldest manor in the city and the closest thing Evernight has to a
courthouse or city hall.

The Tribunal holds court in the upper levels. When it's time to adjudicate a
dispute, they slam iron portcullises over all exits until the session is done,
because as mentioned in the previous post the ghouls eat the losers. They do
find vampires to be a particular pain in the neck to deal with, as they can
transform into mist and fly through the grates.

The House's wide open cellar works as an arena where citizens can work out their
problems without getting the Tribunal involved. There's usually some bored
ghouls, wights and vampires hanging around hoping to watch a fight or three, and
they will gladly act as witnesses to confirm that the few rules of engagement
were obeyed by both parties.

### Temple of Filth

Coterminous with the House of Knowledge in Neverweinter, the Temple of Filth
used to be dedicated to Bhaal and Myrkul, ancient gods of murder and death who
died during the switch-over from AD&D 1e to AD&D 2e. Now it's dedicated to Orcus
and Dorensain.

All of the temple's decorations, including its altar and holy symbols, are built
from corpses and corpse bits. No special care is taken to _preserve_ these
bits. They're just replaced with new ones when they rot away. Ewwww.

The undead of Evernight sometimes ask the priests here to resolve their
disputes, because they tend to demand services from both parties instead of
eating one of them like the Tribunal does. The temple's chief priest is
Ursuntos, whose stats are those of an Adept of Orcus (Level 6 Controller, from
the MM3). He has a bunch of ghoul and vampire underlings, and his political
power in the city is second only to the Tribunal's.

The grounds of the Temple are considered both defiled and necrotic ground as per
the DMG2. Very cursed, but surprisingly not _quite_ as cursed as the Dread Ring,
which has additional effects on top of that.

#### Pool of Daylight

Deep within the temple, behind a bunch of locked doors, traps and magical
darkness areas, is a literal pool of radiance (is this a name drop?) that shines
as bright as the world's mid-day sun. Any undead entering its chamber suffers
terrible pain, and touching the pool can actually destroy the weaker among
them. This is here as the ultimate security measure, for the pool is said to
hide an artifact at its bottom that works as a weapon of mass destruction
against undead. The Temple doesn't want anyone else getting a hold of this.

Good thing living PCs don't need to fear the light, huh? This could be just the
thing to use against those pesky Thayans and Shadovar.

### The Graveyard

Evernight's Graveyard occupies the same area as the pauper section of
Neverwinter's own graveyard. Despite the name, and despite being absolutely
filled with crypts and tombs and graves, from the point of view of the city's
ghouls this place is a _restaurant_.

You see, when an Evernight ghoul catches a living "tourist", they don't eat
right away. Instead, they take the paralyzed victim to a place called Lamantha's
Mortuary, where the resident necromancer will inject them with longer-term
paralytics. Then the ghoul arranges for a "funeral procession" for the
still-living victim, who is buried alive in the Graveyard. Only after the victim
has died and "ripened" a bit does the ghoul crack open the coffin and eat.

### Corpse Market

Coterminous with the "rich" section of Neverdeath in the world, this is exactly
what it says on the tin. A market where undead merchants sell meals to undead
customers who are too busy to catch their own. From preserved blood for vampires
to assorted corpse bits for ghouls to necromantic supplies, you can find all of
that here for affordable prices.

This is also the place to go if you want to hire undead labor. Renting a zombie
laborer costs 10gp per day and requires leaving a chunk of your flesh as
collateral. The chunk is alchemically preserved, so it stays fresh and can be
reattached later. While it's missing, you lose a healing surge.

You might also be able to hire undead guides for about 100gp per day. Some of
these guides might be able to smell specific "flavors" of death from a long
distance away, so they might be useful to an Uthgardt Barbarian who wants to
find their tribe's missing thunderbeast skeleton, or to PCs looking for
Gauntlgrym. Undead guides charge a premium for going into particularly dangerous
places, refuse to fight for their clients and might in fact run away if a fight
breaks out. Other than that, though, they're reliable as long as they're getting
paid.

A creepy old man known as the Resurrectionist wanders the Market every day,
looking for a piece of someone specific he wishes to bring back to life. He
never finds the right one, so he keeps coming back to continue searching. He's
been at this long enough that most standard resurrection magic wouldn't work any
more, but the man guarantees he can bring anyone back no matter how long it's
been.

There's a fenced off area here that contains warehouses and some of the
merchant's residences. While anyone can walk through the market, unauthorized
people caught in this area are assumed to be prowling thieves and are killed on
sight.

### Dark Creeper Enclave

This large manor close to the Graveyard is the Netherese consulate on
Evernight. The Netherese pay a family of Dark Ones, the Glumguts, to mind the
place. They don't have any official authority - their job is to maintain the
house, serve any actual dignitaries in the rare occasions they stay here, and
receive any packages dropped off at the embassy.

Family members like to supplement their income with the occasional spot of
burglary or robbery, though they are careful to restrict their activities to
the living (who can do less about it). They also only target Thayans if they can
get one of them alone, to avoid reprisals.

This is a proper gothic family too: their patriarch Blackclaw, a dark stalker
(level 10 lurker), rules them through fear. The only ones who have the courage
to defy him are his young cousins Thrax and Vinnia, and his son Blackcut. The
trio believes they're protected by Blackcut's relation to his father, and free
to do whatever they want. The truth is Blackclaw simply doesn't know most of
what they've been up to, and will be livid when he finds out. Their shenanigans
have actually been quite detrimental to the family's duties.

### Thayan Outpost

The Thayans are based out of a warehouse near one of the city's haunted piers in
the Black Mound. They have a permanent garrison here commanded by Katrice Ansar
(stats as a human hexer from the MM2, Level 7 Controller). She's convinced they
are being watched by Shadovar spies besides the obvious dark creepers, but has
yet to find them.

Near the warehouse, in an abandoned neighborhood, is an iron gate that acts as a
"dusk crevice" linked to Neverdeath cemetery. It's guarded around the clock by a
unit that includes undead loyal to the Thayans.

## Locations Outside Black Mound

There are only three of these described here.

### Lamantha's Mortuary

Mentioned above in the Graveyard description, this is run by a living human
necromancer named Lamantha who works as a mortician and taxidermist.

One of her main jobs is preparing mortal victims for burial in the Graveyard,
which she does by injecting them with long-term paralytic drugs and dressing
them up. She can also disguise undead so they look like living people through
wardrobe and makeup adjustments, and she can turn bodies or bits of bodies into
trophies and tools (or _sporting equipment_, as the book makes sure to mention).

Since she provides valuable services, the rulers of Evernight gave Lamantha
citizenship and allow her conduct her research in peace. Only the necromancer
herself knows its precise nature - it's something to do with observing the
nature of growth and change among undead. Maybe she's a necro-sociologist?

Despite being completely amoral and quite unhinged, Lamantha is happy to receive
living visitors and get the latest gossip from the middle world. PCs who are
polite to her might be able to use the mortuary as a safe place to rest for a
couple of days, though she will become impatient with them if they overstay
their welcome.

### The Demon Pit

Coterminous with Neverwinter's Chasm, this opened up at the same time, though it
did not disrupt "life" in the cursed undead city nearly as much as it did on the
living one. Like in Neverwinter, the average civilian does not know why this
rift opened up, nor what's down there.

Evernight's inhabitants call their rift the Demon Pit because rumor has it that
it goes all the way down to Dorensain's kingdom in the Abyss. No one tried to
explore it, but they sometimes throw living mortals into the Pit as sacrifices
to Orcus and Dorensain. That's more of a folk ritual than established Temple
practice, mind you.

Like the Temple of Filth, this area counts as both defiled and necrotic ground,
and is still not as cursed as the Dread Ring.

### Castle Nowhere

Coterminous with Castle Never. It looks much more intact and much creepier than
its worldly counterpart, and not even the most ancient of Evernight's undead
citizens can tell when it was built. Like a few other places we've seen in
previous posts, Castle Nowhere only exists _sometimes_, vanishing and appearing
in a ten-day cycle.

No one in Evernight knows much about what goes on inside the castle. They avoid
going in because, get this, they think it's haunted. This is hilarious, but it
also makes you wonder what kind of haunting would scare an undead city.

Some of the legends about the place say that if you're inside the castle when it
vanishes, you don't come back when it does. Others say that the ghosts inside it
feed on _the hunger of others_. This means they can cause the living to starve
to death, but they can also cause a ghoul or vampire to become trapped in a
state of eternal starvation and use them as permanent food sources. A fate worse
than a second death!

There's a box here with a power you can add to any incorporeal undead creature
to make it into a ghost of Castle Nowhere. **Consume** is a melee attack vs. AC
that removes the target from play and inflicts 10 ongoing damage (save
ends both). The target reappears adjacent to the monster when they make their
save.

Living creatures reduced to 0 HP by this reappear normally and become immune to
the power for the rest of the encounter. They make death saves and can be healed
as normal. Undead reduced to 0 HP do not die, and remain trapped until willingly
released by the ghost, or until the ghost is destroyed.

## Impressions

That's a proper creepy city, yes indeed. There's more than enough material to
fuel a whole horror-themed campaign, though I suspect most typical groups who
are focused on other stories wouldn't want to linger here too long.

Still, there are good reasons to visit the place. That artifact hidden in the
Pool of Radiance would be extremely useful to wreck the Thayans, for example,
and if the PCs want to follow the Shadowfell Road to their home base they would
also need to start at the Thayan outpost in Evernight.

Castle Nowhere would make an awesome dungeon, but as written there's barely any
reason for PCs to enter the place. Perhaps they could use it to lure and trap a
powerful undead foe like Valindra, or maybe the quickest way to access the Tomb
of the Nine is by entering Castle Nowhere and crossing to the world through a
dusk crevice.
