---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Thay"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

The Shadowfell Road ends in Thay.

This is where the book technically breaks its promises. While every other place
so far has been presented as somewhere the party could go, the text here sounds
almost scared when it talks about the Thayan heartland because that's where
Szass Tam and all his epic-level wizard buddies live. It makes it very clear
that the PCs should not go there.

Fortunately, the bulk of this section is not actually talking about the massive
plateau that makes up the Thayan heartland, but about the peripheral areas
surrounding that plateau. Special attention is given to Surcross and Veil, a
pair of fortified towns at its base, as well as to the Netherese flying fortress
that's currently besieging them.

Veil is where the Shadowfell Road ends. Surcross is a short distance away and is
where all of Valindra's supplies come from. The main reason the PCs would want
to come here is to disrupt that supply network in order to defeat her back in
Neverwinter. Depending on how the GM sets things up, it's also possible her soul
vessel is hidden somewhere in Surcross.

The area around these two cities is a horrifying wasteland of destroyed nature
and abandoned villages whose ground is coated in bits of bone and flesh that
were too broken up to animate. We'll take a look at the general area here, and
then zoom into the cities and fortress in future posts.

## Overview of Thay

In editions past, Thay used to be a slave-holding nation of evil wizards whose
schtick was over-specializing in one of D&D's schools of magic. Their ideology
was very similar to fascism with wizards at the top of the heap, but they tried
to present a more "friendly" face to the outside world, setting up trade
enclaves while keeping their dastardly schemes secret.

I believe the lich Szass Tam used to be a member of Thay's ruling council, but
now he's taken over completely and became its supreme leader. He turned Thay
into a "nation of undeath", equally devoted to necromancy and conquest. Why
pretend to be friendly to other nations when you can just invade them and take
their stuff? The only deity whose worship Tam permits is Bane, the evil god of
conquest, and he's suspicious of even that. Yes, worship of Vecna is completely
forbidden - I think Tam sees him as the competition.

Thay remains in this state when we switch to 5th Edition, by the way - it's one
of the things they didn't change back.

Climbing to the top of the Thayan plateau is discouraged not only by the book's
scared tone, but by the many defenses placed around it. Its walls are almost
vertical and the only ways up are a set of narrow switchbacks that leave
characters exposed to artillery fire from both sides of the ongoing war.

Both Surcross and the Netherese fortress of Kolthunral have amazingly powerful
weapons and defenses at their disposal. Kolthunral's mission is to cut
Valindra's supply line by destroying Surcross and/or Veil, which is why it
hasn't moved away. The PCs arrive to find them locked in a prolonged siege, as
neither is able to fully overcome the others' defenses.

A significant portion of Thay's forces are composed of undead, both at the grunt
and officer levels. Their living soldiers are mostly humans, orcs, and gnolls,
with plenty of spellcasters.

A character like the Renegade Red Wizard could be very helpful here if they
still have friends in the region, but they're also coming back to the lion's den
and if the Thayans realize the renegade is here they will be relentless in their
pursuit.

In addition to any friends of the Red Wizard PC that might be here, the area
also contains a bunch of spies and infiltrators sent by Dempharis Sibront, an
elderly Red Wizard who escaped Tam's conquest of the nation. Sibront considers
himself nobility in exile and his network of infiltrated rebels is looking for
any way to weaken's Tam's hold on the country. The PCs can form an alliance of
convenience with him to fulfill their own goals, since they align, and his
forces will be genuinely helpful in that situation.

However he is likely to interpret this situation as the PCs agreeing to serve
him indefinitely, and could become an enemy in future adventures when he
realizes that wasn't the case. That seems like an interesting opportunity for
continuing the campaign past the material in the book.

## The Charnel Fields

The horrifying plains of death in the area surrounding the two Thayan towns are
a product not just of the war, but also of Thayan fuckery. Since right after the
first battles, the Thayans started hauling corpses from the battlefield for
animation. But since some of those battles happened far away, they decided to
enact a "little" ritual to make things more convenient, using the blood of the
fallen as a focus.

Any corpse left on or under the earth within a hundred miles of Surcross will be
sucked by the enchanted soil and transported to an area near the city, where it
will be extruded to the surface. This makes it easy for Thayan necromancers to
haul them back for reanimation, and it also attracts all sorts of natural and
supernatural predators who want to feast on the remaining bits. The Netherese
have also started hauling corpses away from the charnel fields, to deny the "raw
material" to their enemies and maybe animate some of it themselves.

### Relsforin

The desperate inhabitants of this small village survived by making themselves
useful to Thay. They make up the bulk of the labor force that hauls corpses from
the Charnel Fields to Surcross, and in exchange receive some protection from
Netherese attacks. They fear the Netherese more than they resent the Thayans,
and if they think a group of strangers (such as the PCs) are likely to be
enemies of their masters, they will turn them in.

### Echo Village

This village belonged to the neighboring nation of Thesk until a short while
ago. The mercantile Theskans built it as a trade post near the Thayan border, to
facilitate commerce with the wizard nation.

Shortly after the war started the Thayans invaded the village and slaughtered
all of its inhabitants to turn them into more undead soldiers. They left the
village behind as an empty husk, but the angry ghosts of the inhabitants soon
appeared to haunt the place and wail about the hatred they felt for their
murderers. This attracted the spirits of _other_ Thayan victims, turning Echo
Village into a sort of gathering point for ghosts with a grudge against Thay.

The ghosts' default reaction to any living people approaching their village is
violence - they'll attack while shouting rants against Thay. PC groups who are
perceptive and diplomatic enough might be able to figure things out from these
rants and convince the ghosts that they too are enemies of Thay.

This would ironically make Echo Village the safest refuge for the PCs in the
entire region, as the ghosts would allow them to stay while still attacking any
intruders. It's an interesting contrast with Relsforin, which _seems_ safe but
is not.

If the PCs then manage to lure the Thayan legion that contains the villagers'
original bodies back to Echo, the ghosts will be able to "repossess" their
bodies and turn against their commanders, potentially slaughtering the whole
legion. This will finally let them rest, and they will inform the PCs of any
sensitive information their bodies learned before moving on from the world.

## Impressions

Yikes! War crimes as far as the eye can see. It does put the events happening in
Neverwinter into context. GMs and players might be used to thinking of
heroic-tier campaigns as being "no big deal" in the grand scheme of things, but
everything that's happening here in Thay is a B plot for the events in
Neverwinter.
