---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Castle Never"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

Castle Never sits on the northern bank of the river, in the Blacklake District
that takes up Neverwinter's nortwestern quadrant. It used to be the seat of its
government, and home to its ruling family. The cataclysm wrecked it and killed
almost everyone inside. The surviving servants decided to seal its crypts,
vaults and grounds, hoping that a worthy heir might make use of them one day.

The castle's ruins are still a towering landmark, and its foundations are still
solid. While many interior chambers were destroyed, some are still intact and a
lot of the interior is at least navigable - most notably the underground
bits. Now it houses several groups who compete with each other for territory.

The book doesn't give you maps, leaving those as an exercise to the GM. There's
enough going on here that it could be a full megadungeon and the focus of the
campaign... or it could be "downsized" to the site of a single targeted delve
for groups who want to keep their focus elsewhere.

## Surface Areas

The surface portion of the castle is partly ruined but still contains a large
number of navigable areas. There are some places of interest that should feature
in whatever map you draw for it, like the **locked armory** or the odd places
detailed below.

### "Drow" Encampment

This used to be a campsite in a hidden spot in the city, near Castle Never. It
was originally set up by Drizzt and Jarlaxe around the time of the cataclysm,
when they were here investigating the Thayans and trying to stop their
plan. They come back every once in a while to attempt to tie off those Thayan
loose ends, usually without much success.

The location of the encampment was recently discovered, however... by their
_fans_. These eager youths and would-be adventurers have made the spot into a
permanent "DrowCon" of sorts. They train together, challenge themselves by
delving the castle, and hope to become good enough to join their idols'
entourages once they return. Neither of the two celebrities have been back for a
while, but Jarlaxe has heard of these events and has sent some of his Bregan
D'Aerthe agents to mind the place and keep a watch for promising recruits from
among the fans. They are Xalbyn the quick-witted rogue, Kimmuriel Oblodra the
quiet and focused mage, and Aerlyse the half-drow psion who spies on the other
two for Jarlaxe. Xalbyn hides his drow heritage with a Hat of Disguise.

The book makes an effort to take this place seriously... but I just can't see it
as anything but comic relief. It would be a funny place to use whether there are
Bregan Spies on the party or not. If there are, then I'm guessing the three
stooges here don't know about them. Jarlaxe seems very fond of keeping his
underlings in the dark.

### Hall of Ashen Mirrors

This is a hallway inside Castle Never. It has huge windows and used to be lined
with mirrors, being a popular spot for young Alagondar heirs to practice their
regal posture. When the cataclysm hit, air pressure shattered all the mirrors,
filling the place with flying glass and killing everyone inside right before a
pyroclasm came in through the windows and turned the corpses to ash.

Now the hallway is very, very haunted. When living people enter, it will
reconstruct itself, and the reflections in the mirrors will re-enact the events
that happened just before the explosion. The replay ends with the
explosion-and-pyroclasm combo, just as deadly as it originally was. Anyone
lingering here for too long is gonna have a bad time.

## Surface Factions

These groups make up the inhabitants of the castle's above-ground
portion. They're all hostile to each other, though some are more amenable to
befriending the PCs.

### Ghosts

Since the castle's destruction was so sudden, pretty much everyone who perished
in it ended up becoming a ghost. They can be found all over the interior, and
are a varied lot. They're not automatically hostile, and PCs who approach them
correctly might strike up some extremely useful conversations with them. However
they tend to talk in riddles both because they like it and because their sanity
might have been a little damaged in the last 30 years. And if the ghosts come to
believe the characters are just there to loot the ruins, they _will_ become
hostile.

### Thayan Forces

Castle Never is Valindra's second major focus in the city of Neverwinter (the
first is Neverdeath Cemetery, as we saw earlier). On the surface, her forces are
engaged in a small war against those of Talgath, which consists of a tense
standoff with occasional battles. There's at least one residential area that
became isolated due to cave-ins after a battle. The ghoul troop that got trapped
inside passes its time wearing the former inhabitants' clothes and pretending to
be nobility, waiting for a rescue that will never come. The PCs will probably
stumble upon them first. Other undead patrols can probably act as random
encounters.

### Talgath, Watcher of Castle Never

Talgath the Beholder has recently moved in. He wants to be king of the castle,
starting with the ettercaps on the upper spires and working his way down. He
pays little attention to humanoid intruders like the PCs, unless they get in his
way.

Valindra sees Talgath as the greatest threat to her goals in the castle. She's
sent people to kill him several times, but Talgath has defeated them all. Not
only is he a powerful monster in his own right, he also makes extensive use of
his charm ray to keep a small army of minions. He brought in a coven of harpies
and a pack of displacer beasts from outside, and has charmed many of the
assassins sent to kill him as well.

### Independent Communities

The castle's atrium was boarded up long ago, and the heat and darkness have
turned the garden within into a fungal paradise complete with a village of very
territorial myconids.

Its upper spires have been taken over by a group of ettercaps who used to live
in the dungeons but were pushed out and up by Valindra. She ignores them these
days, but Talgath is currently trying to enslave them. Their leader says he had
a prophetic dream where a group of outsiders would deliver them from the
beholder, which makes them more likely than usual to befriend the PCs (and give
them that quest).

## Underground Areas

The castle's underground areas are structurally intact. The things that make
them dangerous are of another nature entirely.

### Neverneath

The castle had a sizable dungeon area underneath it, protected by strong wards
that let it survive the cataclysm intact. Radiation from the Spellplague pocket
at the bottom of the Chasm has altered the wards, however, making it so they
actively trap any who enter the dungeon, causing its corridors to shift and
close around these intruders.

Space here is all wonky. A straight corridor can lead you through a circuitous
route full of loops and circles. A door might lead you to a different place than
it did the fellow PC who was just in front of you. The place is filled with
self-resetting traps, and inhabited by a large pack of gargoyles who love to
attack anything fleshy they find. It also houses a small force of desperate
gnolls that stumbled upon it several months ago and haven't managed to escape
yet.

### Vault of the Nine

Below Neverneath lies the Vault of the Nine, where those legendary bodyguards
have been entombed to honor their meritorious service in life. If you're using
the subplot where Valindra plans to reanimate them, her forces are already here
and have turned the vault's many outer chambers into their base of operations,
filling it with guardian undead. If she manages to animate the Nine, she will
order them to kill and replace all of New Neverwinter's leadership, including
Neverember.

## Player Tie-Ins

Why would the PCs want to mess with this place?

The **Neverwinter Noble** has the most reasons for wanting to do so. The ghosts
are likely to be their direct ancestors, for starters! The fabled Crown of
Neverwinter is also lost somewhere inside the castle, and it's likely the most
definitive proof of legitimacy for anyone wanting to claim the throne. Legend
says the crown's magic properties only work for someone of the line of
Alagondar, and that anyone else who tries to wear it gets simultaneously burned
and frozen.

Reaching the Vault of the Nine would also be a desirable goal for the Noble even
if Valindra's forces are not down there. It could be possible to call the Nine
back into service through their oaths to the line of Alagondar, and if the noble
can do so that would be another excellent proof of their legitimacy.

**Oghma's Faithful** would also love to explore this place and find its many
lost historical secrets. They might be mostly interested in interviewing the
ghosts and finding any sealed off libraries, but finding a safe path to the
Vault would also be a worthy goal even if they wouldn't actually want to loot
the place.

Even the **Devil's Pawn** might benefit from talking with the ghosts, as it's
quite possible one or more of them have had to deal with a similar problem
in life.

For everyone else, Neverember is always hiring adventurers ~~stupid~~ brave
enough to delve the Castle in search for the Crown or any other relics and
documents that might help increase his legitimacy. He also wants it to be clear
of monsters so he can move in.

### The Crown of Neverwinter

We get stats for the Crown, and it's indeed a nifty item (level 15, head slot,
strong protections against mental conditions and a nice bonus to social
skills). The stats _do not_ include the genetic lock from the legend, so it's up
to the GM whether those stories are true or not. The people certainly believe
them, in any case.

If the GM likes the idea of the Crown but doesn't want to bother with the
Castle, the crown might be placed in another place that's more relevant to the
campaign. As a lost artifact, it could turn up anywhere for any number of
reasons.

## Impressions

I like the dynamic with the different factions here. There's a lot going on in
this castle and as in any megadungeon the situation here feels a lot less stable
than even the one in the city outside. PCs who come in here are definitely going
to have a drastic effect whether they have themed ties to the place or not.
