---
layout: post
title: "Underwater Dungeon Fantasy"
tags:
    - dnd
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - lets-play
    - hells-rebels
    - gm-hat
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/geoffrey-ernault-skeletonpirateslq.jpg" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption><a
  href="https://www.artstation.com/artwork/3dvodY">Illustration by Geoffrey Ernault</a></figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Underwater adventuring is one of those things that older editions of Dungeons
and Dragons seemed to like more than their players did. Lots of monster books
included a selection of monsters that could only be encountered under the sea,
but every bit of commentary I read on those was always about how no one ever
bothered to include submarine delves in their campaigns. If a sea monster
couldn't go up to the surface to attack a ship or climb on its deck, it was
usually ignored by GMs.

The Dungeon Fantasy lines learned this lesson well, and don't spend a lot of ink
on support for underwater adventures. This was a big problem for me when I was
GMing Hell's Rebels to a group of friends. This particular adventure path
follows the old tradition of making PCs spend a chunk of levels 5-8
underwater. When I got to that part in my GURPS conversion, I had no idea what
to do and got a bit stressed out trying to figure this out on the spot.

Frantically researching rules in real time is no fun at all even when I am the
only player, so for the benefit of my solo Hell's Rebels game and any future
run-throughs with actual players, I'm going to collect everything I know about
fighting underwater in GURPS right here in this post.

I admit I don't have all the officially published primary sources that discuss
underwater adventuring. The ones I'm using are **DF: Exploits** and the
simplified rules that can be found in [Dungeon Fantastic][1], which _do_
reference the sources I don't have.

## Underwater Fighting For Land-Lubbers

If you're not an aquatic creature, you use these rules when fighting underwater.

- Your Move is limited to your Swimming move: Basic Speed/5, minimum 1.

- All of your skills are capped at the level of your DX-based **Swimming**.

- Thrusting and unarmed strikes receive no penalties.

- Some grappling techniques won't work. Others work as normal. GM adjudicates.

- Swinging attacks with Reach 1+ weapons are impossible. This does cover pretty
  much every weapon listed in DF: Adventurers, as even small knives have a Reach
  of "C, 1" when swung.

- Shield bashes are -2 x DB to hit and do half damage. Don't bother trying.

- Blocks are impossible but you still get your shield's DB.

- Parries with Reach 1+ weapons are impossible. Parries with close-combat-only
  weapons like daggers, and unarmed parries, are allowed and suffer no
  penalties.

- Dodge is possible and not penalized, but you can't Retreat.

- No thrown ranged attacks, even from Missile spells. Special underwater ranged
  weapons exist and use specific stats.

- Ranged attacks into our out of water have -4 to hit, 1/10 range, and do half
  damage.

- All through this, you'll be holding your breath under Heavy Exertion (DF:
  Exploits p. 21)!

## Underwater Fighting for Fish and Fish-People

Water adaptation in GURPS has two main components. One is the ability to
_breathe_ underwater. The other is the ability to _move freely_ while
submerged.

In monsters, the first is handled by traits such as **Gills**, some variety of
**Doesn't Breathe**, or the ability to hold their breath for a really long time
even in combat. A combatant with one of these traits doesn't need to worry about
the standard Breath Holding rules.

The second is handled by the **Amphibious** or **Aquatic** traits. If you have
one of these traits, you get a lot of advantages over land-lubbers.

- Your get to use your full Move and skills, not limited by your Swimming.

- You are exempt from most skill penalties from being underwater and from many
  Swimming tests.

- You can Retreat!

- Your other attacks and defenses are limited as for land-lubbers. This is
  important for weapon users, not so much for aquatic beasts.

## From Delver to Diver

If you're a typical delver belonging to one of DFRPG's standard ancestries, then
you fall squarely in the "land-lubber" category, and you have to solve a couple
of problems before you can dive in.

### Breathing

If you don't want your underwater life expectancy to be measured in seconds, you
need to find a way to breathe in there. In most typical DF settings, that means
magic.

#### Spells

The DFRPG boxed set includes two main drowning-prevention measures: the
**Breathe Water** and **Hold Breath** spells. They have different
prerequisite chains but work the same, letting you ignore that part of the rules
for as long as they last. Both have a base duration of 1 minute and an energy
cost of 4 to cast and 2 to maintain, reduced by skill as normal. Hold Breath
is a little better because it also let you survive in non-watery environments.

Their main disadvantage is that their duration is relatively short. Unless the
PC casting these spells has a skill of 20 or more with them, the affected
character is only going to be able to remain underwater for a few minutes at a
time. That's nowhere near enough for a full delve, and it's an even shorter time
if you need to maintain this spell for multiple PCs. If the caster _does_ have
skill 20 then things get a lot easier, but that costs a lot of points.

#### Items

If we expand our scope a little to look at DF supplements, then we see that
Dungeon Fantasy Magic Items 1 has an alchemical **Water-Breathing Amulet**. You
can breathe underwater as long as you wear it... but it costs an amazing
$23.400. Outfitting a party of 5 with that is a very expensive proposition,
unless you find them as treasure.

A reusable casting item like a wand or ring with the Breathe Water spell would
cost at least $8200. This basic version would be powered by the user, so it has
the same duration limits as the spell. Doubling the price would halve the energy
cost, which is better but not perfect.

However, if we expand our scope even further and break out of the DFRPG bubble,
we can go to GURPS Magic and find an alchemical **water-breathing elixir** that
costs $600 in a setting with common magic and gives you the ability to breathe
water for 1d hours! Even a minimal roll gives you a nice amount of time to
explore, and per that book's rules you'll know the duration is about to expire 5
minutes in advance, which is better than nothing.

That elixir is clearly the best approach for campaigns where underwater delves
are a sometimes thing. They're a little less convenient than the amulet, but the
price can't be beat. I'm definitely including this in my campaign.

### Moving

Unless your delvers are willing to spend the time and points to become
better-than-Olympic swimmers, solving their underwater movement issues also
means resorting to magic.

#### Spells

DF: Spells gives us two options here: **Swim** and **Ethereal Body**. The first
makes the subject effectively Amphibious, the second makes them intangible and
thus able to ignore all that water. GURPS Magic additionally gives us **Walk
Through Water**, which makes the user intangible only to water and ice. This
means you don't enjoy 3D movement while underwater... but your maneuvers in
combat are unrestricted! I think I can kinda see why this one didn't make the
cut to the DFRPG.

As with water-breathing, our biggest limitation here are spell maintenance
costs, which limit our unimpeded movement to a few minutes at most. These are
also harder to completely eliminate, since Ethereal Body costs 4 energy per
minute to maintain and the others cost 3. Still, a caster could conceivably save
these for when a fight is about to start, and only cast it on the group's
physical fighters.

#### Magic Items

I couldn't find an always-on item with a Swim enchantment in the books I own. A
basic casting item for Swim will cost at least $20500, almost as expensive as
the always-on water breathing amulet. Lowering its casting/maintenance cost from
6/3 to 3/2 doubles the price, lowering it to 2/1 quadruples it.

We might built this as a charged item instead, with each charge giving you 2
minutes of Swim time and costing 9 energy. A non-rechargeable item would cost
$1350 per charge, a rechargeable one $2700 (plus $180 per charge to reload).

A Walk Through Water item  with the same duration per charge would be a tad
cheaper: $910/$1820/$140. If the GM allows the spell, that is.

In any of these cases, the item is best used sparingly, in the same manner as
the spell. You activate it when it's time for a big fight or a crucial skill
test, and rely on your Swimming lessons the rest of the time.

## Optimal Strategies

Given all of the above, I think we can pretty easily arrive at an "optimal"
strategy for underwater expeditions.

If your group is about to embark in a **campaign centered around underwater
delving**, your PC party should include a caster who can use Breathe Water at
Skill-20, and also someone who can use Swim at Skill-15. A druid or wizard could
do both, a cleric can use Breathe Water and leave Swim to someone else. This is
a hefty investment, but worth it for the amount of use they'll get out of
it. Every PC, caster or not, should also consider investing points into the
Swimming skill, because it can help conserve spell energy and is pretty useful
in itself. You might want to give them extra points for these purposes depending
on your desired power level.

An alternative here is for you to allow players to make PCs from ancestries that
have an easy time underwater. Both Sea Elves from GURPS DF 3 and [Argonians][2]
from this blog have Gills and are Amphibious. [Warforged][3] are a bit less
nimble but don't need to breathe at all. Each delver who is a natural-born diver
will make the rest of the party's life that much easier. For those who aren't,
Water-Breathing Amulets make excellent treasure.

If you're planning a standard campaign that features a **one-off underwater
dungeon**, Water-Breathing Elixirs are the way to go, possibly supplemented by
one or two rechargeable Wands of Swimming. The elixirs should definitely be
easily available in a nearby town (perhaps it's a coastal fishing village?). The
wands might be for sale as well, or might be found as treasure either before or
during the delve. Proper safety procedure is to carry two elixirs per
PC, saving the second one for the return trip if the first one wears off.

If you only have **isolated underwater encounters**, we're back to learned
spells, but they don't need to have high levels. The submerged environment
becomes an additional challenge, but no one is going to spend too long inside
it.

Hell's Rebels in particular fits the second category, so I'll be using that
solution.


[^1]: Unless they've already increased their IQ and power stat enough that it's
    a single-point purchase, but that takes a while to happen.




[1]: https://dungeonfantastic.blogspot.com/2019/01/simplified-df-underwater-combat-revised.html
[2]: {{ "/2018/10/10/elder-scrolls-others.html" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2017/09/17/dfrpg-warforged.html" | relative_url }}
