---
layout: post
title: "The Great Tabletop Hackaton: Cyberpunk RED, Part 2"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - cyberpunk-red
    - gurps
    - cyberpunk
    - hard-wired-island
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
   <img src="{{ "/assets/cp-red-cover.png" | absolute_url }}"
        alt="The cover of Cyberpunk RED"/>
   <figcaption>
     I still think this cover is cool.
   </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


After creating [both our netrunner and the systems she needs to hack][1], we can
start the actual run.

## Run Summary

G0blin Jr. goes in with the physical team, they get past the reception, and as
the rest of the team locks herself in the bathroom to try and hack the security
server.

We are cheating a bit here, because it turns out you need to be within six
meters _and_ within line of sight of an access point to hack the corresponding
architecture. I don't want to actually map the whole office out like I would in
a real adventure, so we're kind of assuming the wireless networks here have the
same coverage as in the SR 4 version. They want to track where all guards and
guests are at all times so there are security server access points in each room,
covering the whole office.

G0blin Junior's strategy is to be meticulous and defeat each piece of ice as it
comes up, to avoid having them pile up on her. Still, even a meticulous approach
looks like a brutal all-out-assault here.

### Security Server

Junior has no problem dealing with the Skunk ice at the top layer in the first
turn. She then uses the Pathfinder net ability to see deeper into the server and
rolls well enough to see the whole thing, even past the Password wall. She now
knows the exact route she must take - down the left branch to disable the alarm
and camera, and all the way down the right branch to unlock the back door and
plant a Virus to keep these things disabled after she logs out.

A quick peek at the files on level 3 sees they're worthless, and then it's on to
the main event: the fight against the Hellhound/Killer pair.

She beats the Hellhound in the contested roll, but loses to the Killer and so
loses a program at random: the Eraser. It's completely destroyed. We'll be
generous and assume she has backed-up copies at home, but they can't be restored
within this run.

Fearing for her software more than for her brain, Junior focuses her attacks
this first turn on the Killer, destroying it after 2 Sword attacks.

After that we're in for a slugging match with the Hellhound. It attacks once per
turn but always goes first, with Junior spending her 3 net actions per turn on
two Sword attacks and one Zap.

A good roll by the Hellhound in the following turn deals only 3 damage to Junior
(thanks to her Armor program), but also sets her on fire. She will begin taking
2 points of damage per turn until she spends a Meat Action to deal with
that. And she can't afford to spend any Meat Actions now.

A series of bad rolls on her part mean she misses her first turn of attacks, so
has to take more burn damage next turn. Fortunately the Hellhound fails to
damage her, and she can finish it off then. But she needs to wait for another
turn and 2 more burn points to be able to put out the fire: you cannot spend a
Meat Action in a turn where you spend Net Actions and vice-versa.

Junior is down a program and 20% of her HP so far. Fortunately she doesn't have
any problem going down the Architecture's left branch and disabling the alarm
and camera.

The Skunk at the top of the right branch doesn't give her any trouble. Turns out
Skunks are harmless when fought alone. The Asp in the next level beats the
initiative contest and destroys her Armor program, though it goes down to the
usual Sword, Sword, Zap combination.

Junior reaches the bottom of the security server, unlocks the door, and spends 2
Net Actions creating a Virus that will keep the security devices off after she
logs out. She then Cloaks her efforts and jacks out.

Total time taken for the security server: 19 minutes.

### Secret Server

A slightly singed G0blin Jr. follows her teammates to the records room and jacks
into the secret server she finds there.

The password is a breeze to blow through, and a good Pathfinder roll lets her
see all the way to the bottom of the server. The Skunk is easily defeated by
turn 3 of this hack. The Wisp loses initiative and goes down before it can
act. The Hellhound wins initiative and further burns out poor netrunner's brain,
leaving her with 17 remaining HP since she has no more Armor program.

She manages to kill it with lucky Sword strikes before it can attack again, but
has to take 2 burn damage and spend a Meat Action extinguishing the fire. She
successfully IDs the evidence file and copies it. She knows there's a Killer
further down but she's hurt and down 2 programs, so she doesn't risk engaging it
in order to cover her tracks. Junior jacks out.

Time for this hack: 10 minutes.

The team has fulfilled their mission, but unlike the hackers of every other
game, G0blin Jr. decides discretion is the better part of valor. She's
half-dead, down two very important programs, and that office net might have
another Hellhound like the two others she jacked into today (it doesn't, but the
doesn't know that). Plus there's a chance that a firefight is ongoing in the
meat world.

The team leaves with the evidence, but without the money.

Junior deciding to give on the money and just leave is the sensible roleplaying
choice. All netrunners are brave folks by definition, but someone who names
herself after a goblin would probably not be _suicidally_ brave.

### But What If She Was?

What if our Goblin had decided to brave the office network in her present state,
after all? What if she had thrown caution to the wind, messaged WITNESS ME to
her companions, and dove in?

She would have succeeded in 10 minutes, but just barely. The Asp takes out both
her Sword programs, and two max damage rolls from the Wisp leave her with a
measly 3 HP before she could derezz it and drain the office accounts.

Junior is probably not making it out of the office if any sort of fight
erupts. And if she does a good chunk of that money is going to pay for her
hospital bills. Her teammates will probably begin calling her "Crispy" if she
survives.

**Total Time Elapsed**: 29 minutes if she doesn't go for the money, 39 (and a
lot of pain) if she does.

## Analysis and Impressions

29 minutes is well within our tolerance for a manageable amount of time, so we
can say that CP RED's system remains fast. It took around 12 minutes for Junior
to disable the camera and alarm, which is about what I consider the top limit
for the rest of the team to be kept waiting. You could cut to the physical team
at that time and go turn by turn to keep everyone moving.

Disabling the door has to happen in the same hack because the system resets when
the netrunner jacks out, but that's an additional 7 minutes so it's OK. The
secret server hack takes 10.

Going for the "easy" office server after being beaten up by the first two does
indeed border on the suicidal. It's fast at 10 minutes, but not worth
it. Cutting your losses and leaving is a perfectly rational decision.

Because ye _gawds_ is this system brutal.

Stealth is not a thing in these rules. The closest thing is the Slide ability,
but that apparently only works to escape combat, not to avoid it. Most ICE
threatens to either permanently destroy your programs or directly damage your
HP, and if I understood the rules directly they get a free and automatic hit
against you if they beat that contested initiative roll.

So avoiding combat is impossible, and getting out unscathed is extremely
unlikely. I feared I made the CP 2020 data fortress too easy, and here I think I
made things too difficult by having three decent-sized Architectures generated
with the random system. It looks like CP RED wants a single big Architecture per
adventure instead of a bunch of scattered smaller ones. If there are smaller
ones, they should be _tiny_ with at most a single piece of ICE or Demon, to help
preserve the netrunner for the main event.


[1]: {{ "/2023/11/03/hackaton-cp-red.html" | relative_url }}
