---
layout: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Penanggalan"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

No illustration this time. The book has one, but it's quite gross.

The Penanggalan is a monster from Southeast Asian folklore (the name used here
is Malay). It was first statted up for D&D in the Fiend Folio, and this is its
4e debut. This entry does make some effort to tie its lore to the Nentir Vale,
but I still think it fits into the "generic monster" category.

## The Lore

Legend has it that the first penanggalan was a young baroness in Harkenwold, who
was very smart but "plain of face and scant of suitors". She found a cache of
old diabolism texts from Bael Turath one day, and decided to use them to improve
her situation. She conjured a devil using the Turathi rituals, and made a deal
where the devil would make her forever young and beautiful in exchange for
eternal servitude.

The lady did become beautiful, but it was the sort of beauty that comes from a
devil's bargain: so beautiful she was that armies clashed for her hand, and that
her father eventually decided to lock her up in a tower for protection. Alone in
her tower, the baroness prayed to the gods and begged for forgiveness, swearing
to do penance before them.

The devil that made the deal with her did not like this one bit, and before she
could start atoning for her sins, he whispered the secret of her beauty in the
ear of Harkenwold's high priest. The priest was one of those "zero tolerance"
types, so he had the lady hanged as a diabolist. Her body remained in the
gallows until midnight, and then her head and entrails separated from it and
went hunting.

All penanggalans have a similar origin: women who make dark pacts for immortal
beauty and try to renege, but who die before completing their penance and
freeing their souls. The creatures share some superficial similarities to
vampires, in that they're undead monsters who feed on the living. Some embrace
their new nature, some keep trying to complete their atonement to perhaps find a
cure, but all of them are afflicted by a powerful hunger for the purity that
once rain in their veins. Even a penitent penanggalan can only resist this
hunger for about three days before going berserk, so atonement is really hard
for them.

The book doesn't go into details on how they feed, but from what I see in
Wikipedia the original legend does say they drink blood. You could interpret the
book's information to say they eat flesh instead. In either case their attacks
are quite fatal because even the traditional blood drinker version spreads a
wasting disease to its victims.

As long as a penanggalan's original body is in good condition, she can squeeze
back into it and disguise herself as a mortal woman. The creatures often look
for jobs as midwives or nursemaids, making victims of young kids and their
mothers. Others prefer seduction as a means to get potential victims alone with
them in a private spot. The original legend also has this really neat (and
gross) detail that the creature bathes its dangling entrails in vinegar to
shrink them up and fit them through the body's neck, but that's not necessary in
the D&D version.

If a penanggalan's body is destroyed, the creature is forever stuck as a
floating head, and usually becomes a lot more desperate and obvious in its
attacks.

## The Numbers

Penanggalans are Natural Humanoids with the Undead tag. Individuals with bodies
are Medium while in mortal form. The floating head with trailing guts is Small.

As undead they're immune to disease and poison, resist necrotic damage, and are
vulnerable to radiant damage. They have darkvision and a ground speed of 6, as
well as a flight speed of 8 in head form.

### Penanggalan

The basic model is a Level 10 Elite Lurker with 162 HP. It has the Shapechanger
tag and can switch between woman and head forms.

In woman form, the penanggalan can defend herself with a **dagger**, but she's
likely in disguise and will try to use her **soothing voice** to literally lull
her victims into a false sense of security. This is an encounter spell that
attacks the Will of everyone in a Close Burst 1, and while it does no damage it
slows on a hit (save ends). After the first failed save, this worsens to
unconsciousness!

I would say that Soothing Voice can be disguised as a song or conversation,
since it's supposed to be subtle. Targets might not notice something is wrong at
first.

Once the jig is up, the penanggalan undergoes her **Horrific Transformation**,
which is so gross it works as a Close Burst 2 attack vs. Will, dealing heavy
psychic damage and dazing for a turn on a hit. This of course transforms the
monster into its head form. The body is considered a corpse for game purposes,
and the penanggalan can return to it with a standard action if it's on the same
space and the body is not completely destroyed.

In head form, the monster attacks with **Bites** that do physical damage and
ongoing poison damage (save ends). It can also use its **Grasping Entrails**
(recharge 4+) to attack up to two creatures at Reach 2. On a hit, this deals
poison and necrotic damage and grabs the victim (escape DC 22). Targets grant
combat advantage until they escape, and are exposed to Blistering Corruption
(see below).

The penanggalan can use its **Maleable Form** as a standard action to gain
phasing for a turn and shift up to its speed. If it starts its next turn hidden
from all enemies, Graping Entrails recharges, and the monster can use both it
and Bite in the same action when it next attacks.

### Penanggalan Bodiless Head

A penanggalan who had its body destroyed a while ago and had to adapt to
survive. It's a Level 9 Skirmisher with 94 HP.

This monster attacks with **bites** that do physical damage, and also slow (save
ends) if the target is granting combat advantage. It can also use its **flailing
entrails** to deal poison damage and slide 1 square on a hit.

The penanggalan can perform a **malleable rush** with its move action, gaining
phasing for a turn and shifting its speed. This recharges after it's first
bloodied. When it dies, it explodes, and the resulting **Death Burst** attacks a
Close Burst 1, deals poison damage, and exposes victims to Blistering
Corruption.

### Penanggalan Head Swarm

Exactly what it sounds like, a pack of floating, starving penanggalan
heads. It's a Medium Swarm of Small creatures, and a Level 8 Soldier with 87 HP.

Its **Swarm Attack** aura (1) slows enemies caught inside. Its basic attack is a
**Swarm of Entrails** that targets a Close Burst 2, deals light poison damage
(or more if the target is slowed), and slides the target 1 square to a space
adjacent to the monster.

### Blistering Corruption

Turns out this version of the penanggalan also spreads a wasting
disease. Blistering Corruption is like supernaturally-boosted measles or
chickenpox, causing sores, blisters and boils to erupt all over the victim's
body. You get exposed to it through contact with penanggalan entrails, and must
succeed on a save to avoid contracting it as usual.

This level 10 disease is resisted with Endurance, and has a Maintain DC of 13
and an Improve DC of 18. Its effects are cumulative. At Stage 1, it inflicts a
-2 penalty to Fortitude. At Stage 2 it also halves your maximum HP (making you
permanently bloodied) and healing surge value. At Stage 3, you gain an aura 2
that cannot be deactivated, and eats a healing surge from any creature that gets
caught inside.

As with other diseases, you stop making recovery rolls once you hit
stage 3. Blistering Corruption doesn't kill you, but it makes you weak and
unbearable to be around. Only Remove Affliction or equivalent powers can save
you from this fate once you hit Stage 3.

## Final Impressions

D&D's penanggalan is surprisingly similar to the traditional story I saw on
Wikipedia. The story has somewhat more varied origins for the creature, though
the "woman who practiced evil magic and was cursed by it" is also there.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
