---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Mages of Saruun"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-mages-of-saruun.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Another faction pulled from the _Thunderspire Labyrinth_ module.

## The Lore

Thunderspire Mountain is a famous landmark in the Vale, a lone mountain whose
peak is shrouded by a permanent storm. In the Vale's distant past, a minotaur
civilization build an underground city beneath it, and named that city Saruun
Khel. They thrived there until the worship of Torog began spreading among its
inhabitants.

This angered their official patron, the demon lord Baphomet, who cast a curse
over the whole city that made his worshipers enter a homicidal berserker
rage. Saruun Khel fell in short order as its inhabitants tore each other apart.

About twenty years ago, the ruins of the city were discovered by three mages who
were interested in finding a reliable route to the Underdark. They found it
there and moved in, establishing their headquarters inside a building known as
the Tower of Saruun.

The mages were as interested in trade and diplomacy with the Underdark as they
were in its mystical secrets, so they turned Saruun Khel's city square into a
trading post known as the Seven-Pillared Hall. The hall is open to trade
delegations and enclaves from both the surface and the Underdark, and is one of
the few places in the world where civilizations from both of these realms have
regular peaceful contact.

That doesn't mean the place isn't dangerous, however. Big stuff like theft and
murder is forbidden, and the mages enforce that very vigorously, but there are
few other hard-and-fast rules. The mages take turns playing the role of
Ordinator Arcanis, a mage with a black cloak and a golden mask that teleports in
to solve any disputes or rule breaches that happen here. They use powerful
divination and scrying magic to quickly get to the truth of the matter, and
usually blast the offending party into atoms, or sic one of Saruun Khel's
ancient minotaur-shaped bronze constructs on them.

The three original founders eventually brought in colleagues and apprentices to
join their order. Then they disappeared into the Tower of Saruun and were never
seen again. The cycle has repeated itself a few times since then, so the current
crop of Mages is a few generations removed from those founders. No one knows
what happened to those disappeared mages, and the mages themselves ain't
telling. Some claim there have only ever been three mages who keep disguising
themselves as new people, others talk about a mage civil war that happened in
the Tower, and some who have journeyed from the deep Underdark whisper of
surface mortals who have gone down there and learned the forbidden secrets of
the primordials and the deep gods.

## The Numbers

The Mages of Saruun contained in this entry are at an early to mid Paragon power
level, significantly stronger than the ones from Thunderspire Labyrinth. If I
remember correctly, the ones you see in the adventure are all low-ranking
members who are the only ones available while the more senior mages are
out. These would be those senior mages.

### Saruun Apprentice

Apprentices are fairly weak, so I'm guessing they only fight in self defense and
are not directly involved with keeping the peace in the Seven-Pillared
Hall. They're Level 8 Minion Controllers.

Apprentices know how to use a **dagger**, and they can cast an at-will **Ice
Patch** spell that knocks the target prone on a hit. The spell only does damage
on a critical hit, in which case it also immobilizes the target for a turn.

### Saruun Bat

The aggressive bats that make this cave system their home are often used as
familiars by the Mages. These Tiny Natural Beasts are Level 10 Minion
Skirmishers with a ground speed of 2 and a flight speed of 6 (hover).

Saruun Bats can **See the Unseen**, which act as an aura (1) that prevents
enemies inside from benefiting from any concealment. They lack a basic attack,
but can make at-will **Shrieking Dives** that let them fly their speed and make
an attack at any point along the movement. On a hit, this deals thunder damage
and inflicts a -2 to-hit penalty for a turn.

If an enemy damages an ally of the bat that's in the same space or adjacent, the
bat can use its **Shielding Familiar** encounter power as an interrupt. It makes
the ally take only half damage, and drops the bat to 0 HP.

### Mage of Saruun

This is a fully trained Mage of Saruun, likely one of those who currently run
things in the Seven-Pillared Hall. They're a Level 12 Controller with 116
HP. Their basic attack is a **quarterstaff** blow that deals physical damage on
a hit and slides 1 square as an effect. They can cast **Empowered Magic
Missiles** as basic ranged attacks, which hit automatically, deal a flat 10
force damage, and push 2 squares. They can also cast **Noxious Shroud** spells,
which attack a Close Blast 3, deal poison damage, and create a damaging zone
that lasts for a turn.

Their encounter spell is **Cloying Flames**, basically a fireball that also
immobilizes and deals ongoing fire damage. This deals half damage on a miss and
recharges when the mage is first bloodied.

The staff and magic missile attack are a little weak for the mage's level, which
is compensated by the fact that they always either hit or do something
interesting. Still, you want to pair them with things that do more damage, such
as those described by our next entry.

### Bronze Warder

The famous construct guards of the Seven-Pillared Hall, originally build by the
extinct minotaur civilization and refurbished by the Mages of Saruun. At least
one of those accompanies every mage when they make a public appearance, and
they're often employed as enforcers by the Ordinator Arcanis. They look like big
bronze minotaurs.

Warders are Large Natural Animates and Level 10 Elite Soldiers with 168 HP. They
have a ground speed of 5 and their **Ponderous** gait means they can't shift,
but their **Inexorable Movement** allows them to enter the spaces of Medium or
Small enemies.

Warders fight with **Greataxes** that damage and mark for a turn on a hit, and
they can make **Double Attacks**. They can also **Rampage**, which lets them
move 3 squares and knock down any enemy whose space they move through.  At the
end of the movement they make an axe attack that's about 50% stronger.

Warders are linked to rune-covered control amulets, and consider the bearer of
the amulet to be their master. When they're within 2 squares of that master,
they can use an interrupt to take half the damage of any attack directed at the
master (who still takes the other half).

### Saruun Underdark Adept

A mage who focuses more on those forbidden Underdark secrets than on traditional
arcane magic. This is dangerous and a bit unhealthy. Adepts are Level 10
Artillery with  79 HP.

Their basic attack is a Reach 2 **Shadow Whip** that deals light physical damage
on a hit and slides 1 square as an effect. They can cast **Darkfire Bolts** that
do fire and necrotic damage. Unlike magic missiles, these require an attack roll
but crit on a roll of 18-20, weakening the target when they do so (save
ends). Their big spell is a **Corrupting Ray** that deals heavy necrotic damage
and blinds (save ends). It does half damage on a miss and recharges when the
adept is first bloodied.

They can also cast **Force Shield** as a minor action, becoming immune to ranged
and area attacks for a turn. This recharges when they take damage from one of
those attacks.

### Warped Mage of Saruun

A mage who dug too greedily, and too deep. The order sees this as a fail state
and is usually careful to avoid such a fate. When it does happen, they try to
deal with the result, which might involve discreetly asking for outside
help. Warped mages are Medium Aberrant Humanoids and Level 14 Elite Brutes with
346 HP.

Their basic attack is a Reach 3 **Shadow Tentacle** that deals physical damage
and grabs on a hit (escape DC 21). When a creature fails to escape the grab it
takes 10 damage.

They can also use at-will **Tentacle Lashes** to attack enemies in a Close Blast
3, damaging and knocking them prone on a hit. Once per encounter they can use a
**Psychic Burst** to attack enemies in a Close Burst 2, dealing psychic damage
and dazing on a hit (save ends). A good power for when they're surrounded.

When a warped mage is stunned or defeated, they undergo a process of **Arcane
Release**. The energies attack a Close Burst 2 deal damage with _four_ types:
cold, fire, lightning and thunder. They also deal half damage on a miss.

## Final Impressions

As mentioned above, the mages' damage on their at-wills is a bit on the low
side, so they really need some beefy bodyguards.

Thunderspire Labyrinth has plenty of details about stories that can happen in
the Seven-Pillared Hall and the subterranean complexes that link to it. The
Blackfang gnolls feature prominently there as well. The mages from this entry
would probably be a distant and vaguely threatening presence until the PCs reach
their power level.

And of course, things would get mighty interesting around the Hall if the Hunter
Spiders ever learned that it leads to a reliable route into the Underdark.
