---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Neverwinter Campaign Setting: Netherese"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

As mentioned several times in this Let's Read already, Netheril was a human
empire who ruled over most of the world around three thousand years before our
narrative present.

Their understanding of magic reached levels never seen before or since, but they
fell literally overnight when one of their top archmages tried to cast a spell
that was supposed to make him into a god but instead irreversibly fucked up
Toril's magic. This caused the vast majority of the flying islands where these
archmages lived to plummet to the ground.

One such island managed to avoid this fate when its inhabitants plane-shifted it
into the Shadowfell (known as the Plane of Shadow back then). They stayed there
until the end of Second Edition, when they started coming back into the world,
mutated by their millenia in darkness and with a desire to rebuild their former
empire.

These shadow-people are known as Shadovar, but they also consider themselves to
be Netherese and the book uses the two terms interchangeably. There's a group of
them hiding in the Neverwinter Wood, led by a mage named Clariburnus Tanthul.

## Goals

The Shadovar have a single major goal in this region: to repair the fallen
island of Xinlenal.

Xinlenal was the first Netherese flying island ever built, the crowning
achievement of the ancient archmage Iolaum, who discovered the technique to
making them. Making it fly again would raise the flag of Netherese dominance
over the whole region, and it would become their greatest center of power in the
entire world.

The key to fixing Xinlenal is to repair its _mythallar_, a magical engine that
looks like a giant crystal sphere and shines like a contained sun. It shattered
when the city fell, and Shadovar artificers are hard at work repairing it as the
campaign starts. The process requires immense quantities of Residuum, and the
easiest way to produce Residuum is to destroy magic items. The older and more
powerful, the better.

This means Shadovar agents are scouring the entire region looking for ancient
ruins and the magical relics they contain. The ruined cities of Illefarn, the
crumbling outposts of Delzoun, even the burial mounds of Uthgardt heroes: all of
these are fair game, and anyone who would object to their plundering is an
enemy.

Not even these ancient ruins might yield enough residuum for their purposes,
though. They've started looking at less-old places too. As the campaign starts
that's still mostly consists of clashing with and looting the bodies of Thayan
and Ashmadai goons, but they could soon move up to plundering Neverwinter
itself.

One of Caliburnus' secondary goals include discovering the fate of Iolaum. Sure,
the wizard lived thousands of years ago and was on Xinlenal when it fell, but
surely one of the bestest mages from the bestest magical empire ever wouldn't
let little details like that kill him, would it? Imagine what he could do for
the Shadovar cause if he's brought on-board!

The other secondary goal is to pursue their war with Thay. There's only room for
_one_ world-spanning fascist mage empire in this planet, after all. The Shadovar
regularly attack the Thayan base in the Dread Ring, and they've also managed to
park one of their flying fortresses above the Thayan city of Surcross, which
they bombard regularly. In case you don't remember, that's one of the possible
locations where Valindra might have hidden her soul vessel.

And finally, further down the list, there's the handling of the Gray Wolf
Uthgardt tribe. The Shadovar recruited them into their service with appeals to
their "ancient Netherese heritage" and gave them the mission to infiltrate and
eventually conquer Helm's Hold. So far the werewolves have managed to place
several agents in the town, who are busy sowing unrest and generally making it
ready for a takeover. Their progress is slow but in Caliburnus' view the tribe's
main purpose is to act as a red herring when people start trying to investigate
Netherese activities. In the meantime, Gray Wolf warriors also get used as
muscle when the need for it arises.

## Player Tie-Ins

The Netherese seems to be the major faction with the most explicit tie-ins to PC
backgrounds.

The Scion of Shadow, of course, starts the game in direct conflict with
them. They have enough information to begin opposing the faction right away, and
especially bold Scions might think to pretend to be loyal in order to infiltrate
it.

Their rampant plundering of ancient ruins also places them in direct opposition
to the Iliyanbruen Guardian, Heir of Delzoun, and the Uthgardt Barbarian. The
book says they are definitely guilty of stealing those eladrin relics, but it's
less definitive about their role in plundering the Uthgardt barrow - that could
have been the Thayans depending on what the GM desires. Even so, their control
of the Gray Wolves will still make them cross paths with both the Barbarian and
the Pack Outcast.

## Relationships

The Netherese don't care about **New Neverwinter** at all, though that will
change a bit when they start targeting the city for its magic items.

They are completely ignorant of the **Abolethic Sovereignity**. Some of their
officials suspect there's something funky going on beneath Neverwinter and have
sent agents to investigate, but they're only going to bother Caliburnus about
this when those agents return with answers. This makes the fact that they're
trying to conquer Helm's Hold particularly funny.

They see the **Ashmadai** as nothing more than minions of the Thayans and have
no idea the cult has plans of its own. The **Thayans** of course are their
greatest enemies in the region and the Shadovar devote as many resources to
fighting them as they do to restoring Xinlenal.

They also have some important links to minor factions, as mentioned above. Their
hold over the Gray Wolves means they will have to deal with the other **Uthgardt
Tribes** eventually, and the **fey of Iliyanbruen** are the primary targets of
their relic raids.

## Impressions

While the Netherese are a bit less cognizant of the other factions than I
expected, their plans are appropriately ambitious and they have a real shot at
success barring PC intervention. They also have a bunch of strong ties to
several PC themes, so they're very likely to feature in your campaign.
