---
layout: post
title: "The Great Tabletop Hackathon: Neon City Overdrive"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - cyberpunk-red
    - gurps
    - cyberpunk
    - hard-wired-island
    - neon-city-overdrive
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
   <img src="{{ "/assets/nco-cover.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
   <figcaption>
     Neon City Overdrive's cover.
   </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


Neon City Overdrive is a game written by Nathan Russel and published by Peril
Planet Game Studio in 2020. This is the smallest core book of all the ones we've
seen so far at 72 pages.

We'll also be looking at a supplement named The Grid, which focuses on hacking
and has another 60 pages.

## Setting Overview

Most of those 132 pages are dedicated to the setting and to a set of adventure
seeds, both of which are largely based on _vibes_ instead of relying on
laboriously crafted timelines or detailed maps. This is the game of stylish
cyberpunks running dangerous jobs in a neon-lit sprawl. The reader is expected
to take it from there to add details as needed.

The setting as provided is just a basic sketch. The game takes place in The
City, which is divided into dense residential and commercial zones called
Metroplexes, equally dense hellish industrial blocks named Grinders, and the
Streets that flow in between. The City and the world it's in are covered by the
Grid, a global computer network where nearly every device that can be described
as "electronic" or "computerized" has a presence.

The Grid gets a somewhat more detailed description because I'm using material
from the supplement here. Like the physical world it has several components. The
Signal lets all those devices connect to the Grid. It's maintained by an army of
antennas, and repeater drones. The devices attuned to the Signal generate The
Overlay, which is projected into the physical world as a combination of
holograms and augmented reality. Most devices have an augmented reality
interface instead of physical controls, and most signage exists in the Overlay
only. Hubs are big static computers. Some of them help route and maintain the
Signal and the Overlay, or host public virtual environments, but others are
private servers used by the sort of organization your cyberpunks need to hack.

You can use the grid through an interface that resembles a real-world smartphone
or desktop browser, but it's also possible to go into full immersion VR. This
works as you'd expect if you're familiar with the genre (and if you've read the
other entries in this series, you are). We have our Gibsonian matrix here, with
wireframe or low-poly graphics by default, but with specific hubs represented as
more realistic environments. The more powerful the owner, the more realistic
their hubs' presentation.

A lot of social events happen entirely in the Grid's virtual reality, from
important business conferences to sport tournaments and nightclub
gatherings. Virtual reality ensures they feel mostly like physical events. That
sure would have been handy during our real world pandemic.

The downside is that "common" grid users are constantly monitored and
tracked. Player characters and other dirty criminals have their ways of evading
this, and despite the efforts of law enforcement agencies and corporate
security, grid crime is very common and not going away any time soon.

When you go into VR, you emerge at the Local Area Zone corresponding to your
physical location but can move to any other LAZ you can access with a
thought. Movement within a LAZ is restricted to the sort of thing a real person
would be able to do in the physical world, and the landscape reflects this. Want
to go to a site in your LAZ? You need to walk. The book recognizes this is
inconvenient. Some area zones are private, either disconnected from the public
Grid entirely or separated from it by virtual gates that admit only those with
the proper credentials. A skilled enough hacker might be able to break through a
gate. Totally isolated networks can only be accessed by physically jacking into
their hubs.

People can access the grid using wearable computers, which are cheap and widely
available. Serious hackers (called _codeslingers_ here) have an implanted
interface chip that has all the same functions and allows diving into VR as
well. Those who can't or won't use implants can make do with a "Grid-box", a VR
helmet that also covers the mouth and nose. And both can further benefit from a
sensory deprivation chamber if they're _really_ serious.

This default presentation is subject to change, as GMs are encouraged to tweak
the arrangement to get the right vibe they want. By tweaking the list of
available technologies and how common they are you could get anything from
mainframes-and-telephones with a chrome veneer to a Ghost in the Shell-like
ubiquitous net where everyone has implanted computers.

## Mechanics Overview

From what I understand the rules of Neon City Overdrive belong to the lineage of
Forged in the Dark games. There are _no_ specific mechanics for the Grid here,
not even if you use the supplement. Hacking uses the exact same mechanics as
everything else.

Tests use six-sided dice. You start with one Action Die, and gain more for each
factor in your character sheet or the story that helps you succeed, and a Danger
Die for each factor that gets in the way. Then you roll the resulting pool. Each
Danger Die cancels an Action Die that rolled the same value. You take the
highest value rolled in the remaining Action Dice, and use it to determine the
result. A 3 or less is a failure, a 4 or 5 is a partial success with a cost
attached, and a 6 is a complete success. The book goes into a bit more detail
than this, but we don't need it for this article.

Narration and the fiction it creates are _supremely_ important because they'll
set the stakes for the roll and inform you of which positive and negative
factors are in play to build your die pool. Players are the only ones who roll
dice. Enemies and obstacles are a source of Danger Dice but the GM never needs
to roll for them.

Hacking also uses those rules. The additional rules material in the Grid
supplement is just a clarification that purely physical traits and tags don't
apply to tests made in the Grid, and Grid-specific ones don't apply to the meat
world. CanÂ´t use your muscle grafts to hack the Gibson, can't use your fancy
programs to lift a car. Mental traits might apply to either "reality", though.
The book encourages focusing on the imagery of the simulation and making it as
close to the physical world as possible, to make it easier for the group to
describe actions without needing to know a lot about computers.

## Run Parameters

We're supposed to set the exact shape of our Grid when we play, so let's say
it's more or less the same as Shadowrun 4th Edition's. It's not a pure mesh
network, there's cell tower hubs and such, but it's close enough for our
purposes.

Our hacker will be going along with the physical team. The target office's Grid
layout is the same as in the SR4 version. The physical location surely has its
own set of tags but the one that affects us is that our good disguises give us
the _element of surprise_. Losing this might be one of the consequences for a
hacking complication here. In a real game that'd affect the rest of the team
too.

### Target Systems

We have an office intranet that's connected to the general Grid through a
firewall, which we bypass by being inside the office. Its security from the
inside is _nothing special_ except that access to the bank accounts is
_well-guarded_.

The internal security wireless network covers the office but not connected to
the outside. It's _hardened against intrusion_ and has a piece of Blue ICE
that will trigger at the first complication.

Our secret server in the records room with no wireless network at all. Our
hacker must physically jack into it. It's also _hardened_, and has Black ICE
constantly watching over it.

### Our Hacker

#### Pixie (non-binary human)

**Trademarks and Edges**: Metroplexer, Codeslinger (Hacking, Cyber Combat),
Infiltrator (Alarms, Locks)

**Flaws**: Greedy, Socially Awkward

**Gear**: Interface Chip (Fast, Advanced), Icebreaker (Silent, Deadly), Stealth
Program Suite (Mimetic, Subtle), something else non-hacking related.

Pixie is kinda min-maxed to fit our scenario, to be honest, with lots of traits
that would apply to hacking. They're a passable sneak in the physical world but
not very good at physical combat and bad at social interaction. That's what the
rest of the team is for.

## Run Summary

Our team gets into the office as usual - we always assume this part works
out. Pixie hides in the bathroom to find the security network and hack into it
via VR.

I decide to roll the security server hack as an extended task, since those
require three successes and we have three goals in here. Pixie decides to use
Infiltrator instead of Codeslinger for this, since it is an infiltration of
sorts and that's where they put put their Alarms and Locks edges. I'm being
lenient towards my player (who is also me) here. Those traits plus all other
relevant tags give Pixie a total of seven action dice.

Pixie is opposed by a single danger die, from the server being Hardened, but
that die rolls a six and eats the one I rolled on the action dice. They're left
with a 5 and a 4, which count as successes towards our goal but apply
consequences as well. So I rule we lost our Element of Surprise and that the
Blue ICE on the server activated.

I rule that the ICE hasn't found Pixie yet, but it does get to add its relevant
tags as danger dice on the next roll as it looks for them. Fortunately none of
those roll a six and the action dice do, allowing Pixie to unlock the final door
ahead of time. Tests from this point on are made using Codeslinger as expected,
since they deal purely with stuff that lives in the computer.

We get to the secret server and I rule that the Black Ice in there is already
active but will only spot Pixie as a consequence - they start out stealthy. The
ICE however does get to add its Counter-Intrusion and Scary tags as danger dice
even so. Fortunately its rolls are crap and Pixie gets a 6, finding and
downloading the evidence.

Finally, let's go for the money! This means the office network's Well-Guarded
tag becomes a danger die, but as before the ice only comes online as a
consequence. We roll a 5 here, so it does come online, but not before we
transfer the money.

The physical team proceeds to try to leave the office, but as usual we stop our
simulation here since the main hacking bits are done.

Total elapsed time: 15 minutes.

## Run Analysis

I love engaging with crunchy mechanics but narrative systems do have their
advantages! 15 minutes is the fastest time we have so far, beating the "silent
run" from SR 4th Edition by 2 minutes. And this only took so long because I have
absolutely no experience with Neon City Overdrive and had to keep looking at the
books.

It's possible this run was too easy, but it's okay because it's inserted into
the larger context of the physical break-in. Pixie would have plenty to do in
that part of the run. I might have made a mistake here in simply having
"unaware" ICE add some of its tags to the hacking roll. The system is abstract
enough that I could have ruled slipping past the ICE undetected would require
"fighting" it and filling its Harm boxes while describing it as a sneaking
attempt. Whatever form it took in the narrative, combat would have made things
take longer, but not by much.

The mechanical bits of the run would probably be much faster than the 50/90
minutes I've been assuming here, but this would be offset in all cases by the
extended narration and roleplaying the game demands to frame those mechanics and
establish all the influencing factors for each roll.

Our experiment however does allow us to conclude the obvious: when you use the
exact same simple resolution mechanic for everything, everyone has more or less
the same spotlight time and the classic "Decker problem" won't manifest.
