---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Oghma's Faithful"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-neverwinter-oghmas-faithful.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Oghma is the Forgotten Realms god of knowledge and thought, occupying the
roughly the same position as Ioun does in the default 4e setting. This
particular PC is one of his worshipers, and for a while now they've been
receiving dreams and visions from the god. These start as nightmares, but soon
the threats are burned away by divine fire and the dreamer finds themselves in a
grand hall where the sound of a water clock can be heard.

The meaning of these visions is clear: the faithful must go to Neverwinter and
restore the House of Knowledge, a big temple to Oghma that was destroyed in the
eruption. Neverwinter used to produce famously accurate water clocks, you
see. This, and many of the city's other lost craft secrets, could be restored
from the temple's archive, if it still survives. This would help the city's
reconstruction immensely, and of course bring the worship of Oghma back to the
region in a big way.

This is about as lofty a goal as that of the Noble, though it's much less
concerned with secular politics. The Faithful is still going to need allies, and
so has a ready-made reason to work together with any other PCs interested in
restoring the city.

Oghma's Faithful can belong to any race or class. Though the book says the theme
fits divine characters better, the actual powers printed here surprisingly good
for skill-monkeys from all power sources. Essentials Clerics can also pick up an
Oghma domain, shown later. The theme's background skills are History, Religion,
and Streetwise.

## Features

At level 1, the Faithful gains the **Understand Language** power, an encounter
power that lets the PC choose a language they've heard or seen in the last 24
hours and become able to understand it until the end of the encounter. Outside
of combat, that would be about 5 minutes, but as this is an encounter power you
might as well consider the PC constantly able to understand that language during
extended exploration sequences.

At level 5 the PC gains another power, **Sudden Insight**, which once per
encounter lets them re-roll a skill check and take the second result. This is
any skill, not just knowledge ones.

At level 10, they gain a +4 bonus to Perception checks made "to search", which I
guess means to actively search for something (such as traps, treasure, or the
right book in the temple's archive).

## Utility Powers

As always, these become additional options when it's time for the PC to choose
utility powers.

**Learned Response** is a level 2 daily power that lets the PC use the result of
an Insight check as their initiative for that combat. Even to me this feels a
little too narrow in scope, but it does mean the low-Dex cleric will act much
earlier once per day.

**Bad Idea** is a Level 6 encounter power which can be used as an interrupt when
an adjacent creature attacks the PC. The PC slides the attacker 2 squares to
another adjacent space, and inflicts a -2 penalty to its attacks and saves for a
turn. Good for melee skirmisher-types like rogues or avengers. Clerics probably
have something better to choose here from their class.

**Tactical Inspiration** is a level 10 encounter power that lets the PC shift 3
squares to be adjacent to an enemy as a move action, and also allow an ally
within 5 squares to shift 3 squares for free. I could see a warlord or rogue
taking this too, to help gain combat advantage earlier.

## Impressions

This feels less spectacular to me than the Neverwinter Noble theme, as I'm not
very enthusiastic about the FR pantheon. Mechanics-wise, it's mostly about
improving your skill checks, which can be awesome in the sort of campaign
suggested by this book where you can have plenty of non-combat investigative and
intrigue scenarios. It's probably not going to do much for your combat
effectiveness, though.

Multiple PCs with this background are very easy to accommodate in the same
party, as they would all share a common cause and would have every reason to
work together.

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-neverwinter-blues-brothers.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    See? It's quite easy.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}
