---
layout: post
title: "The Great Tabletop Hackathon: Shadowrun 5th Edition, Part 1"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - cyberpunk-red
    - gurps
    - cyberpunk
    - hard-wired-island
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
   <img src="{{ "/assets/sr5-cover.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
   <figcaption>
     Shadowrun 20th Anniversary's cover.
   </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

For this post we'll be taking a look at Shadowrun 5th Edition, originally
published in 2013. The book we're looking at is the Master Index Edition
published in 2016, which is largely the same but incorporates some errata and
includes an index of supplementary material.

I'll confess I have some reluctance to tackle this specific system, because its
return to expensive cyberdecks was part of what made me kinda stop paying
attention to Shadowrun at all. But I'll read it with as open a mind as I can
manage and give its rules a fair shake just like I gave all the others.

One thing I notice is that they have switched back to the more "conversational"
style employed by SR1, which makes it much harder for me to understand the
rules. It's more of a problem here than it was in SR 1 because there are a lot
more rules and concepts they're trying to get across.

## Setting Overview

Visually, the Shadowrun 5th Edition Matrix is a complete return to The Full
Gibson Experience. An infinite black plane criss-crossed by shimmering silver
lines, upon which swim thousands and thousands of icons representing small
connected devices and users. Way up above in the sky float the giant geometric
shapes of corporate hosts.

Descriptions focus almost entirely on the visual, with the technical bits
boiling down to "it's everywhere" and "no one fully knows how it
works". "Civilians" still use commlinks like they did in 4th edition, and
"smart" devices that are currently online around them show up as icons in
augmented reality. The descriptions we get for the uses of augmented reality
here are actually pretty good and evocative. However, it's not the main
event. It seems that any time someone would use a web browser for something in
the real world, they go into full VR instead.

If this Matrix has any basis in reality, it would be on the popular perception
people had of the Internet in 2013, and the fears they had for its future. Cloud
computing is a concept that looms large here despite not being explicitly
named. A Matrix host is a location that doesn't have a 1-to-1 correspondence to
a single physical device. In other words, the reason they're all up in the sky
and visible from anywhere in the world is because they're all _in the
cloud_. Access to cloud services also tends to be the explanation for why
certain devices gain mechanical bonuses when they're online.

The Matrix is split into Grids. When you connect to the Matrix you are in
whatever local grid services your physical location. Big Corps have private
global grids where all their stuff lives. You can access stuff that's in other
grids without going there, but for the best connectivity you'll want to
grid-hop, which requires some hacking if you're lacking credentials.

The "fears" part comes into play when the book says the Matrix is almost
entirely locked down and under the control of the megacorps. Those everyday
civilian uses are allowed, provided people pay their fees or consent to getting
bombarded with ads. The entire Matrix is watched over by the Grid Overwatch
Division, an organization composed of law enforcement and corporate specialists
whose job is to sniff out and eliminate any and all hacker activity.

"Hacker" here is an umbrella term that covers both _deckers_ and
_technomancers_. Deckers use cyberdecks, devices which are a little bigger than
commlinks and have extra hardware that lets them be used for
hacking. Technomancers still use their quantum-bullshit-powered brains (and I
still think they're cool).

Cyberdecks are back to being super-expensive, with prices comparable to those of
SR1. The cheapest deck costs the same as an armored cargo truck, the starter
used by our sample character costs a bit more than a luxury sports car, and the
best one costs the same as a couple of light military vehicles. Fortunately it
appears they no longer require much in the way of optional hardware
enhancements, and programs tend to be much cheaper, but still the price of a
deck is once again the main thing making "decker" an exclusive specialist niche.

## Mechanics Overview

Devices have Matrix Attributes that dictate their base capabilities. All of them
have a Device Rating that represents their general robustness, a Firewall
attribute that is used for defensive rolls, and a Data Processing test that gets
used for searches and other generally lawful operations. Cyberdecks have two
others, Attack and Sleaze, which are used for hacking. Hosts have also have
these so that they can fight back against hackers.

Most devices, including hosts, have "static" attributes, but cyberdecks have an
"attribute array" of four numbers that can be allocated dynamically between
those last four values. Their device rating is still static and cannot be
changed.

Instead of having user accounts, each icon, device or host has a single owner
that has full control over it, and it might accept _marks_ from other users on
to grant them more limited levels of access. An example is a social network host
lets users register by placing a mark. More marks means more access, and the
limit is three. The owner counts as having four.

Hacking a device means placing uninvited marks on it, and using the access those
grant to perform Matrix actions that get you closer to your goal. Different
actions require a different number of marks to attempt, and unless those marks
are legitimate most of them still require hacking tests to perform and might
fail. They're opposed by the host's rating and its ASDF attributes.

Hacking actions use either the Attack or Sleaze attributes. Attack actions are
"loud" and alert the host that it's being attacked when successful; when they
fail, they cause Matrix damage to the hacker. Sleaze actions are "silent" and
don't increase the hacker's visibility when successful; when they fail, the host
becomes aware of the hacker, places a mark on them, usually triggers IC.

With both types of action, successes on the target's resistance rolls increase
the hacker's Overwatch Tally, even when the hacker wins the contest. When this
tally hits 40, GOD's eye is upon the hacker. They take a boatload of damage, get
forcibly ejected from the Matrix, and their physical location is instantly
traced. In other words, game over[^1]. If inside a host when this happens,
they're "merely" instantly detected and have 3 marks placed on them at once,
which makes all the host's IC extra effective against them. And you bet all that
IC will be activated at once.

Rebooting your cyberdeck resets Overwatch Tally to 0, but it also erases all
marks you've placed, so while you'll usually reboot right after a run is
finished you'll need to wait a bit longer if you still need those marks.

IC fights using the host's rating and ASDF attributes. Some variants try to
place additional marks on the hacker, while some attack either the hacker's
deck, their brain, or both at the same time. The more marks the hacker has on
them, the greater the damage they do. It's possible for the hacker to spend
actions removing these marks, but this ironically is also an illegal action and
accrues Overwatch. It also doesn't make the host or the IC forget about the
hacker, it just makes enemy attacks less effective.

Matrix perception works a bit differently than in the past. Most icons in close
proximity (and there are several ways to define this) are automatically visible
and identifiable unless they're _running silent_, which means they require a
Matrix perception test to notice. Running silent gives a penalty to all of that
icon's rolls, so the hacker is usually the only one running silent during a run.

## Run Parameters

We'll be using the sample decker from the core book, a dwarf lady. She has a
Hermes Chariot starter deck with a device rating of 2 and an ASDF of
5-4-4-2. She has a few programs that help with cybercombat but her specialty is
still stealth, with an effective skill of 9 for that approach.

It looks like our host design philosophy is The Full Gibson once again. A given
location will have a single host that takes care of all of its business and is
connected to the wider Matrix, only this time it represents a set of servers in
the cloud instead of a mainframe. Nevertheless it is considered to be at the
same physical location as the office.

There are rules incentives to being in close physical proximity to your target,
and our hacker lacks the accessory that would let us ignore those rules (a
Satellite Link), so she will be joining the physical team and hacking from the
inside.

This is a private business, so we'll give the host a rating of 4 according to
the guidelines on page 247. Its ASDF ratings are 5-4-6-7, which gives us the
"surprisingly high security" requirement. Cameras, alarms, and door locks are
Rating 3. The alarm is running silent.

For IC, it runs Patrol at all times. When it detects an intruder it launches
Killer, followed by Track. When it detects unauthorized access to the buried
evidence it launches Sparky. As usual, whenever one of these is destroyed it's
immediately relaunched at the start of the next combat turn.

The file containing our target evidence would normally be _archived_ and thus
impossible to access without some social engineering, but we can cheat a bit
here and assume there's a physical jack point in the records room that allows
access to the files.

With all this in place, we'll see how our decker does next post.



[^1]: Petty rant time: Many Shadowrun GMs love the idea of omniscient and
omnipotent organizations that stand ever ready to squash players, and I guess
GOD made it in either because of their demands or because some of SR5's writers
were ascended GMs themselves.
