---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Devil's Pawn"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-neverwinter-devils-pawn.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


The North has always had a reputation as a hotbed for cultist activity,
especially in these dark times, but this reputation is more than a bit
exaggerated. In truth, most of those cults are groups of young nobles from minor
families who get together to appear edgy, intimidate rivals, and have really
wild parties. They start their meetings with some mock evil ceremonies for the
lulz, then proceed to drink themselves into a stupor and leave a mess for their
servants to clean.

Choosing this theme means you were one of these "cultists" until
recently. Though you come from a noble lineage, your family was never wealthy
or very influential. You saw the cult as an opportunity to make useful
connections and advance your own wealth and power. Also, the parties were really
fun.

One day, you were late for a meeting. And when you arrived you found all of your
cult buddies dead, the room painted with their guts. In the center of the
carnage, the brazier you used for your pretend "diabolic rituals" burned with an
intensely hot flame that drew you in as if you were a moth. It lashed out and
etched a brand on your chest, and the pain caused you to pass out.

You woke up at home, but your hope that this had been just a nightmare faded
when you noticed that the brand was still there. You somehow recognize it as a
mark of Asmodeus. You fled your native Waterdeep in a confused panic, heading to
a backwater where no one knew you: the ruined city of Neverwinter. You found
allies and protection in the other PCs, though you are reluctant to share your
dark secret with them, and haunted by dreams where you betray them all.

This theme is the best choice for infernal warlocks who want to warlock twice as
hard, but there are no hard class prerequisites. There are no racial
prerequisites either, though since the PC is also from a minor Waterdeep noble
family they are likely to be a human, half-elf, elf, dwarf, or
eladrin. Tieflings with devil ancestors are also an interesting possibility
(guess FR tieflings are more similar to old-school ones).

The theme skills are Bluff and Religion.

## Features

As mentioned above, these features let infernal warlocks go at it twice as hard,
and they also lend an infernal "flair" to non-warlocks.

At level 1, the devil's mark allows you to use the **Hellfire and Brimstone**
encounter power. This uses up a minor action and creates a zone in a Close Burst
2 around you. Creatures in the zone when it's created take 5 fire damage (7 at
level 11, 10 at 21). Anyone inside afterwards takes a -2 penalty to all attack
rolls and defenses. The zone lasts for a turn.

The damage from Hellfire and Brimstone feels a bit low, but it's automatic. And
the attack/defense penalty is useful for everyone at all levels.

At level 5, you gain a +4 to Diplomacy to interact with devils, and people or
creatures devoted to them (like diabolists or duergar). The brand exerts a pull
on them and draws them to you, whether you want to or not.

At level 10, you gain 10 Fire Resistance. If you already have fire resistance
from other sources (such as being a tiefling) it increases by 5 instead.

## Optional Powers

The fiction here is that you trade a bit of your soul to learn these powers (or
to _use_ the level 10 one), but that doesn't have any more mechanical impact
than other infernal warlock powers. All of them also grant you additional
benefits if you're an infernal pact warlock.

**Traitor's Brand** is a Level 2 daily power that can be used as a reaction when
an enemy within 5 squares hits you. You cause all creatures adjacent to that
enemy to take 1d6 fire damage. Add your Int modifier to this roll if you have
the Infernal Pact feature.

Int isn't usually a high attribute for infernal warlocks, so the bonus is likely
to be low. But hey, it's automatic damage, so every point helps.

**Shielding Hellfire** is a Level 6 daily power that uses a minor action. It's a
stance that envelops you in dark infernal flames. This gives you a +4 power
bonus to Stealth and Resist 5 Fire. If you already have fire resistance, it
increases that by 5 instead.

If you have an Infernal Pact, whenever your Warlock's Curse is triggered the
stance also gives you a +4 power bonus on damage rolls from fire attacks until
the end of your next turn.

**Pit Fiend Harbinger** is a level 10 daily power that uses a minor action, and
represents you fully embracing the power of your brand. In other words, you turn
into Devilman: your skin hardens into blackened scales and you grow wings and
horns. This gives you a +2 power bonus to AC, a fly speed equal to your ground
speed, and fire resistance equal to 5 + (your level). As usual, if you already
have fire resistance it gets increased by 5 instead.

The downside of the transformation is that you can't spend healing surges and
you must make an attack on your turn each round or take damage equal to your
level at the end of the turn. This damage cannot be prevented or reduced in any
way. Warlocks already want to be attacking every turn anyway, but this could be
a problem if the last enemy falls before they can attack that turn, or if an
enemy prevents them from attacking somehow.

All of this lasts for a turn but can be sustained with more minor actions. If
you have an Infernal Pact, you gain 10 temporary HP every time you sustain the
power, which neatly remedies or mitigates both downsides of this power.

## Impressions

This feels like an ironic take on the "edgy but not evil" trope, since a PC with
this theme _thought_ they were that but then it turned out their pretend cult
drew the attention of actual cosmic evil.

You can still be an involuntary wielder of infernal magics if you stick with
just the features, but by default there's nothing "involuntary" about the
optional utilities: they represent you willingly trading bits of your soul away
for more power. And both the level 6 and 10 powers seem like a very tempting
choice for an infernal pact warlock, be they full- or multi-class.

I don't think multiple PCs with this theme in a party would work out. The
default inciting incident is very specific, which means all of the Pawn PCs
would have been present there. Them being in the same party set ups an
unsustainable tension between "no one must know!" and "this one
knows!".

Also, the more Devil's Pawns you have together, the higher the chance one of
them would succumb to the temptation of embracing these powers, dragging the
others down along with them. An all-Pawn party might start with the best of
intentions, but it would turn into an evil campaign quite soon. I'm not sure I'd
allow it in a group at all. If someone really wanted to play a warlock, I'd try
to convince them to take the Fey Pact instead.

There's a bit of lore elsewhere that claims most PC infernal warlocks are
following an esoteric tradition based on _stealing_ power from Hell, which
allows them to wield infernal powers without imperiling their soul and could
explain why devils generally dislike the character instead of being drawn to
them. Separated from its story bits, this theme could represent a warlock who
gained their powers through the more traditional path of making deals with
devils. They are more powerful than a theme-less warlock, but also more evil.
