---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Neverwinter Campaign Setting!"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-neverwinter-cover.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Before I started writing this post, I was convinced the **Neverwinter Campaign
Setting** was the last setting book for D&D 4th Edition. Turns out there were
two more published in the following year, one for Undermountain and another for
Menzonberranzan.

I didn't even remember these books existed, which I guess makes sense since they
seem to have a much narrower potential audience. Neverwinter, in contrast, is
probably the most famous place in the Forgotten Realms, and at the time of this
book's release in 2011 it was even known to a lot of people who were outside of
the FR fan community.

That's because by that point in time the city had already been the setting for
two successful computer games! Neverwinter Nights came out in 2002. It's the
game that put Bioware on the map, and it didn't take long for it to develop a
huge trove of fan-created modules and expansions, in addition to the official
ones it got in the years following its release. The sequel was developed by
Obsidian and came out in 2006, and though it was less open to fan additions it
kept getting expansions up to 2009.

And there was also the _third_ big game featuring Neverwinter, the MMORPG of the
same name. It was developed concurrently with the book, something the book
itself makes a point of advertising in a side box in its introduction. I think
the book came out a little earlier than the game, because delays are a fact of
life in video game development, but they're much more integrated than I thought
at first. The MMO is still active as of this writing, over a decade after its
launch.

Of course, the Neverwinter Campaign Setting is also perfectly capable of
standing on its own merits. It places a much greater emphasis on the "campaign"
part of "campaign setting", which was a novel approach when it came out and
influenced the presentation of most 5e campaign books too.

## The Book's Introduction

The very first thing we see after the table of contents is an Introduction
chapter that explains its approach in a very concise manner. The book cover the
city of Neverwinter and its immediate surroundings, focusing on a small area of
a larger, already-published setting (Forgotten Realms). It's not a static atlas
or travelogue - it's a tool for running a campaign. It's meant to be easy for a
GM to customize, and its player options help build PCs that are deeply involved
with several big plots that can make permanent changes to the setting.

The book is geared towards the Heroic tier (levels 1-10), so all threats and
challenges in the area are appropriate for characters of those levels. This
includes the main villains of the piece. Your PCs will not be stuck fighting the
grunts and flunkies of some epic-level villain. They will get to face legendary
threats on their own, without any overpowered NPCs around to bail them out or to
steal the scene.

I'm paraphrasing the book here, and I like that these assurances are right on
the first page. It's an important thing to include when dealing with the
Forgotten Realms, which has been traditionally full of untouchable epic villains
and scene-stealing epic NPCs.

The also emphasizes that the situation presented in its pages is a starting
point - it's a situation that will quickly begin changing as soon as the actual
game starts. The PCs are not only expected but _encouraged_ to get in there and
meddle with things. There is plenty of intrigue going on and adventure hooks are
everywhere, but the story itself is not on rails. Just as the PCs are encouraged
to change things, the GM is encouraged to adapt to their actions and not try to
force a pre-determined outcome. This is a very nice sentiment! Let's see if they
manage to uphold it.

Rules-wise, the book is going to make heavy use of character themes. Themes were
introduced in the Dark Sun Campaign Setting book as a new "thing" to complement
your class in the Heroic tier, just like paragon paths and epic destinies do
later. Dark Sun had several Athas-specific themes, and I think Dragon Magazine
introduced a few other more generic ones later. Neverwinter presents its own set
of themes, which are even more specific than Dark Sun's - each of them ties into
one of the major plot threads they describe here, and some of them even make the
PC in question the "main character" of that thread.

As for required book, the core set is a given - that can either be the PHB+DMG
duo or the equivalent Essentials set of Rules Compendium and "Heroes of..."
books, though it's going to place a bit more emphasis on the latter. In both
cases the Monster Vault is recommended over the Monster Manual, and the
Forgotten Realms books (Player's Guide and Campaign Setting) are nice-to-haves
in order to flesh out the wider setting and give players a few more options.

Over the next few posts, we'll be looking a the book chapter by chapter. Some
chapters my take up more than one post. This should take a lot less time than
the monster books did, but I hope you enjoy it just the same.
