---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Helm's Hold"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - neverwinter
    - lets-read
---


We're getting outside of the city proper now! Helm's Hold is a small town
located on the edge of the Neverwinter Wood, built around a monastery and
cathedral dedicated to the god Helm. It's about a day's travel northeast of
Neverwinter.

The town's proximity to the Wood and its traditions of rugged individualism give
it big "American frontier" vibes, tempered a bit by the monastery's own
culture. Helm used to be the god of guardians, and the monastery's purpose since
its ancient founding is to give sanctuary to those who have none. The monastery
came first, and the town slowly grew around it.

About a year before the Spellplague, when the inhabitants had just laid the
foundation for the cathedral, Helm died. The grieving priests and citizens
finished the huge building as a monument in his honor, and kept its purpose as a
sanctuary, welcoming people of all faiths.

My experience of Helm's Hold from the computer games and reading this book is
that the place's narrative purpose is to be infiltrated and secretly taken over
by the current campaign's Big Bads. It happened in the first computer game
(ancient underground civilization), it happened again shortly before the
Spellplague (Netherese), and now it's happening once more (the aboleths). We're
headed for a plot pileup here because the Netherese are also trying to
infiltrate the town anew, via their werewolf minions.

## Lurking Threats

Those mysterious disappearances and murders are caused not by the spellscarred,
but by the Grey Wolf Uthgardt, who have been ordered by their Netherese masters
to infiltrate the town and cause chaos. They're proficient at disguising
themselves as locals or pilgrims, which lets them get into position to wolf out
at night and go hunting. The core of their force hides out in the Wood. The
Netherese don't think the Hold is strategically valuable, they just want to keep
the barbarians occupied until they're needed in their true function as
expendable muscle to throw against the Thayans.

The two barbarian-themed PCs are quite likely to end up here, and a peaceful
resolution to the Grey Wolf plot would involve convincing them the Netherese are
both evil and not interested in the tribe's well-being. This has to be done
subtly, though, as they are likely to attack the Pack Outcast on sight.

And of course there's also the cathedral itself, which is currently being run by
Rohini's group and thus is a secret aboleth center of power. No one else knows
about this currently, though ironically the AbSov is also interested in solving
the murders because it will reduce the suspicion currently directed at them.

## The Hold and Environs

The Hold's mission as a sanctuary turned into the region's premier treatment
center for Spellplague victims, a duty which only became heavier about a year
ago when Lord Neverember made it his official policy to send any such victims he
finds in Neverwinter to the cathedral.

The rest of the region tends to see the spellscarred as dangerous freaks, but
the inhabitants of the Hold see them as unfortunate victims affected by a
horrible curse. Still, the overwhelming influx of new patients has been testing
their open stance, as the city had to do a lot of rush construction to
accommodate them all, with limited success. You can find newer buildings
haphazardly constructed between older structures, their quality dubious due to
the Hold's chronic labor shortage. Most skilled builders are over on
Neverwinter, where the work pays better.

The Hold's citizens are further stressed out by the recent spate of mysterious
murders and disappearances, which the more conservative among them have started
blaming on the spellscarred. A group of spellscarred activists calling
themselves the Heirs of Azure has sprung up to try to counter the distrust
heaped upon their community. However, the Mintarn detachment sent by Neverember
to help keep the peace isn't having much success tracking down the real
culprits, tensions keep increasing.

The city is governed by a council of elected Speakers who meet at a former
tavern named The Dragon's Gauntlet. They're also split on the issue of the
spellscarred, though the official stance is still receptive since current Chief
Speaker is in that camp. The council's collective power is waning, as there are
enough mercs in town that they could declare martial law unopposed. Their
commander, however, is uncharacteristically responsible and dutiful, so the
order won't come from him.

### Heartward

The market plaza, so named because there's a shrine to Sune here. Fights are
frequent because resources are scarce and prices high. Every now and then, at
night, a major haunting happens here and a bunch of ghosts goes through the
motions of market life. Some crew the stalls, some walk around making purchase
and talk to each other. Most of their words are gibberish, but some are
prophetic.

### Old Dirty Dwarf

And old, respected, and dirty tavern, with a reputation as the place for new
arrivals to go in order to get the lay of the land and hear the latest news from
the Hold. The owner is friendly to the spellscarred, but some of the staff
aren't. Agents of the Prophet keep an eye here at all times and report news to
their boss.

### Scar Alley

The ground under this neighborhood softened during the Spellplague, causing many
of its buildings to sink and crack. Nowadays it's a barely-standing,
precariously-patrolled slum that is home to the most deformed of the
spellscarred, those even the Hold shuns. It's also filled with shady characters
and the occasional monster hiding out in an abandoned ruin.

## Helm's Cathedral

The aging faithful of Helm's Cathedral now share it with a contingent of Oghma's
priests who arrived to set up a sanatorium for spellscarred patients. Brother
Satarin commands the former: he's a 160 year old dwarf who was an acolyte before
Helm's death. Rohini the Prophet officially commands the latter, and is the de
facto boss of the whole place. As we learned a few posts ago, she's a former
succubus turned aberrant creature, and serves the Abolethic Sovereignity, as do
all her subordinates. She holds the loyalty of Helm's old priests because some
of her (fake) prophecies hint at his return.

The surface levels of the cathedral are airy and well-lit. The underground is
far less pleasant and houses the sanatorium for the most "severe" cases. Rohini
spends a lot of time down there "treating" them (i.e, turning them into
foulspawn). They go out for exercise every day, and the foulspawn among them are
only detectable as such by people specifically looking for them.

### The Warrens

This was a failed attempt to expand the city's drainage system, abandoned when
the dig broke into the monastery's old crypts and was overwhelmed by
monsters. It became a kind of unofficial sanatorium for monstrous humanoids
afflicted by the plague, who find no acceptance even in a tolerant city such as
this. Goblins, kobolds and others venture into the city to steal food for
themselves, and this has given rise to rumors of fey hauntings. I think it still
connects to the rest of the crypts, described below, and would be a good
alternate route for parties who want to sneak in. I'd probably run that as a
negotiation focused adventure rather than a classic murdery crawl, at least
until the PCs get to the crypts where the actual bad guys are.

### Crypts of the Vigilant Eye

These crypts lie beneath the Cathedral, and predate its construction. Though the
levels closer to the surface were clearly used by priests of Helm from the older
monastery, things get more ancient and mysterious the deeper you go. There's a
big vertical pit full of side niches that could only be reached by flight or
teleportation, and is now full of gargoyles. There's a hallway full of gigantic
robed skeleton statues that don't resemble any sort of Helmite iconography.

And all that is without counting the twisting of the place by Spellplague
energies and its current occupation by AbSov agents and foulspawn. Or the
trapped Grey Wolf recon force that still hasn't managed to find a way out
through all of that.

The deepest levels turn into caverns that were excavated and mutated by the
Symphony of Madness, turning into a fungal underground swamp. These are
Chartilifax's hunting grounds, so they probably contain all sorts of creatures
that are tasty to dragons and dangerous to adventurers. From here you can enter
a pulsating tunnel to the brain-like chamber containing the Hex Locus, a bronze
coffer that acts as a repeater for the Symphony of Madness.

The Locus chamber can also be reached via a teleportation circle somewhere in
the crypt levels, and Rohini will use that as soon as she learns someone is
inside. She is linked to the artifact and can feel when someone enters its
room. This is likely where any final confrontation against her and her pet
dragon will occur.

## Plot Hooks

The Spellscarred Harbinger will most likely be told to go here soon after the
campaign starts. The Pack Outcast and Uthgardt Barbarian's pursuit of the Grey
Wolf might also bring them here early.

The city's werewolf problem and the creepy happenings at the cathedral should be
obvious enough to get the PCs investigating, and the growing tension between
locals and refugees would make a fine secondary plot line.

Rohini herself would not appear immediately villainous - she would instead
attempt to coopt the PCs and get them to help with her goals. By default that's
serving the AbSov, but the book offers a few alternatives. Perhaps she wants to
break free of them and would secretly help them destroy the Hex Locus instead of
protecting it. She is of course still a devil, so she might double-cross the PCs
once she has what she wants.

Independent of that, Mordai Vell is working hard to woo her, aware that she's a
devil in disguise but unaware of all the rest. So _he_ might hire the PCs as
go-betweens in his courtship efforts. That'd be a fun way to introduce the AbSov
and Ashmadai to the campaign.

## Impressions

I tried to be fair and write a complete summary of the material in the book, but
the truth is that I have a hard time caring about what's going on in the town of
Helm's Hold proper. The original Neverwinter Nights computer game colors my
perceptions here - it skipped the "town" bit entirely and placed you directly
inside the monastery, which it treated as a dungeon. I only learned the Hold was
an actual town once I read this book.

I feel like most campaigns will go a similar route, focusing all of their "urban
intrigue" creative energy on Neverwinter itself and treating the Hold as a
mostly-skipped prelude to the big delve into the cathedral and the crypts
beneath. On the other hand, it would also be possible to do the reverse and
ignore the big city depending on your party composition. There are several
themes that have more reason to start at the Hold than at Neverwinter, like the
Spellscarred Harbinger, the Uthgardt Barbarian, and the Pack Outcast.
