---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Ashmadai"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

Since before the cataclysm that destroyed the city, the Neverwinter region was
being infiltrated by the Ashmadai, a particularly powerful cult of
Asmodeus. There's a lot of backstory here, which seems to tie into to a Drizz't
novel. Let's try to go over it quickly.

So back before the Cataclysm, the Ashmadai mostly worked as flunkies for the
Thayans, because the Thayan leader Szass Tam had in his possession a scepter
believed to be an unholy relic of Asmodeus. They were the wizards' muscle when
they tried to destroy Neverwinter to build the Dread Ring, their super
necromantic fortress.

After that plan fell through in a Drizz't novel, the Thayans fled the area and
left the Ashmadai to their own devices until recently, when this Thayan lich
named Valindra came back and announced she was the unholy scepter's new owner,
demanding the cultists' loyalty.

The cult now finds itself split into two sub-factions:

The traditionalists are older and less educated, and serve out of genuine faith
in their evil god. They're okay with going back to being Thayan flunkies because
of the scepter, which they value highly. They're led by a dwarf named Favria.

The "new guard" is less religious and a lot more pragmatic. They want to retain
their independence and rule the region themselves. They're led by a tiefling
named Mordai Vell.

## Goals

Those two sub-factions are actually quite friendly with each other. Their
leaders meet regularly, even though their lower-ranking members have no
contact. Favria will happily leave the Thayans' service if Vell can steal the
scepter from them. Vell also wants to capture Valindra's soul vessel, which will
let him extract some payback from the lich for all the abuse she has been
heaping upon them.

Once they've attained their independence, the Ashmadai plan to move on to
dominating the region. What exactly this means is up to the GM, and will inform
their strategies. Do they want to rule the region openly as its new imperial
masters? Do they want to establish themselves as a "legitimate" religion and
rule that way? Do they want to be a power behind the throne? Do they want to
harness Maegera's power to do so?

That said, the Ashmadai are by far the weakest of the major factions from this
book, so a lot of their more immediate goals revolve around fixing that and
avoiding the notice of the others.

The pragmatist faction operates mostly from the shadows. Mordai Vell established
a complex system of cells or "pods", where the highest-ranking leaders report to
him but don't know each other, and this structure repeats down each leader's
hierarchy all the way down to the dumb muscle on the ground.

The traditionalist faction is more direct and violent, though they mostly keep
out of town unless called upon. In areas already under their control, they paint
their symbol on buildings and alleys as a way to remind the local populace who's
boss.

Like the aboleths, the Ashmadai are fond of kidnapping people. Their victims
become sacrifices in a peculiar arrangement they have with their diabolic
patron. For each devil they summon into the world, they must also bind a mortal
to a devil's spirit. These possessed individuals can look like mortals while
using devil stats, or use their original stats with the addition of a couple of
thematic powers. I guess this devil-summoning must be the Ashmadai's primary
means of increasing their firepower, but since those possessions are framed as
the _price_ of the summonings I'm guessing the possessed are not directly
beholden to the cult's hierarchy. Whether it's possible to rescue them
from this possession is up to the GM.

## Player Tie-Ins

The Devil's Pawn is on a collision course with the Ashmadai, who will make big
efforts to recruit them. They will also go after people who look like they can
rise to positions of power in Neverwinter, like the Noble.

Whether the cult tries to actively recruit the PCs or not, they can certainly
use their services against the aboleth menace. PCs who would never accept
working with diabolists might be approached by disguised agents intending to
point them at their enemies.

It's not actually stated anywhere within this entry, but other places in the
book say the Ashmadai control the above-ground portion of Oghma's temple,
meaning Oghma's Faithful is very likely to end up fighting them.

## Relationships

The Ashmadai are hard at work trying to infiltrate New Neverwinter, but they
haven't managed to make any progress with Mayor Soman Galt (who, as we saw, is a
pawn of the aboleths already). Mordai himself is busily trying to convert
General Sabine of New Neverwinter to his cause, and has a good shot of managing
this as her natural disposition is compatible with the cult's.

The Abolethic Sovereignity is the competition, and they're ahead. The cultists
ideally want to seal the chasm leading to their base, or otherwise drive them
off permanently, but they're not even close to accomplishing this. The only
reason the Ashmadai are still around is that the aboleths don't consider them a
serious threat.

As mentioned above, the Ashmadai are nominally serving the Thayans while looking
for a way to break free of that servitude. They only do the minimum to prevent
Valindra from suspecting them, but their rebellious plot is doomed to failure as
Valindra does not have that relic scepter any more - she shipped it back to
Szass Tam as soon as she was done showing it off.

The cult looks at the Netherese with much more genuine awe, though. They've
begun holding secret talks to forge an alliance, though they're still having to
keep that hidden from the Thayans.

## Impressions

As far as major factions go the Ashmadai are kinda weak. All of their major
goals and strategies lead them down a path that ends in a face-first collision
with one of the factions. They can't recover the scepter because it's not here
any more. They can't corrupt New Neverwinter entirely because the aboleths got
there first. The direct approach to conquest doesn't work because all the other
would-be conquerors are stronger.

Of course, there's a small chance that campaign events and PC actions end up
giving them a leg up, if only because the PCs open a power vacuum the cult can
exploit. I myself am not inclined to make them into a major threat, because it's
always refreshing to have a group of villains you can easily stomp into the
ground.
