---
layout: post
title: "The Great Tabletop Hackaton: Shadowrun 4th Edition, Part 2"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - cyberpunk-red
    - gurps
    - cyberpunk
    - hard-wired-island
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
   <img src="{{ "/assets/sr4-cover.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
   <figcaption>
     Shadowrun 20th Anniversary's cover.
   </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

After setting up our parameters in the previous post, we start the run here.

I actually ran this one a couple of times, because it took me a bit to fully
internalize the rules. My main mistake was assuming I was familiar with them
already and only reading them superficially to "refresh my memory". This made me
get some crucial basic facts wrong, causing my first run to be really fast but
incorrect.

So I made an additional run where I tracked the die rolls accurately and got
detected in one of the hacks. Then I read the rules outside of the Matrix
chapter more closely and made another one where I spent Edge more wisely and
accomplished all goals without being detected. I'm referring to these as the
**loud** and **silent** runs. They are recorded below as a single account with
notes on how they diverge.

## Diff-merging Timelines

Our hacker enters the building with is team. They get past the reception as
usual, receiving temporary badges. Once inside, he feels a "sudden" need to go
to the bathroom, and locks himself inside a stall. He spends a couple of turns
scanning for the badge's wireless signal, and finds it.

He then tries to hack into the badge, still using AR because it's a fragging'
badge. He succeeds quickly. As expected the badge can't do a lot, but it knows
how to talk to the security server and now so does the hacker.

Our hacker then switches to VR and goes hot, after bracing himself so he doesn't
fall down in the stall. He tries to get himself security-level access because he
knows from examining the badge that user-level accounts do nothing in this
server.

This is where our timelines diverge. In the **loud** run, he gets in but also
gets detected. The server issues a restricted alert against his persona,
triggers the Blackout ice, and pings the guards. Restricted alert means the
server's Firewall increases by +4 against the hacker.

The hacker and the IC go into cybercombat, with the hacker winning
initiative. Cybercombat here resembles the SR1 version a bit, though the exact
things you roll are different. With the expenditure of a couple points of Edge,
our hacker manages to destroy the ice at the start of the second combat turn,
without suffering any trauma to his brain meats. Still, in this timeline the
guards are suspicious of the team.

In the **silent** run, luckier rolls let the hacker in without being detected.

In both, the hacker manages to disable the camera and alarm, letting the team
move into the records room. While they perform a physical search for hard
copies, our hacker jacks into the secret isolated server and goes into hot sim
VR again. He manages to get in undetected, though in the **silent** run he has
to spend the Edge he didn't spend in combat to do so.

I rule that finding the files requires no tests, as this is only a single node
and the existing data search rules are for searching the Matrix.

Still in the records room, our hacker decides to be daring and hack the office
network in search of those drainable accounts. This network has a wireless
signal covering the whole office and is quite visible, so he gets right to it.

At first, our decker easily hacks himself a user account. From there he runs a
data search on the network's user directory to find the one who has access to
the bank accounts, and then attempts to gain access to it. I give this a low
Threshold because it's a small intranet.

Finding the accountant's profile, the hacker attempts to hack into it. That's
like starting from scratch, this time going for a security account. Again the
hacker manages to get in undetected, and again in the **silent** run he needs to
spend Edge to do this.

Draining the account requires no additional rolls. And since our hacker retained
his account at the security server, unlocking the back door requires no rolls
either. Of course, in the **loud** timeline there's a very high chance that
they're doing this during a firefight, as the guards are extra-suspicious and
would have known to check the records room...

The **loud** run that had cybercombat and an alert took 31 minutes. The
**silent** one took 17.

## Run Analysis and Impressions

This system is my personal favorite so far, and I had to actively keep myself
from adding little cool bits that kept appearing in my imagination, because I'd
otherwise would have found myself running an entire solo adventure, controlling
the whole team and imagining dialogue in my head.

Having "my" character be present with the group certainly helped stir the
imagination, because he wasn't sitting pretty at home. I had to think about how
he navigated the physical site with the rest of the group, and from where he'd
jack into VR to avoid suspicion, and so on.

I do love that the system was very fast compared to the other ones so far, but I
wonder how much of that is down to the design of the target nodes. I'd love to
hear about how people design their own adventures.

We can see how Shadowrun's system still favors silent runs here. Cybercombat
against even a single instance of ICE takes a while to resolve, and the more of
it there is the longer the run will take. Careless hackers could easily find
themselves having to deal with multiple ICE cubes at once, perhaps even in
different hosts, and that will drastically lower their chances of success. More
advanced rules let hackers run their own agent programs, which helps fighting
the icy hordes but makes things take more real time to solve.

That said, let's see how our sample runs here fit with the physical team's.

If we again assume the physical part of the run takes 50 minutes for a perfectly
stealthy team and 90 minutes with a firefight on the way out, then it's also
possible to correlate our diverging runs to each of these scenarios. The
perfectly sneaky run would mean a perfectly sneaky hack. The loud run would
almost certainly be caused by that alert we got, unless our talker was _amazing_
at their job.

So, in the more common silent/silent and loud/loud scenarios, our hacker took up
around 25% of the total session time, which is pretty close to ideal in a
four-player party. In an anomalous loud hack/silent run scenario, they take up a
little under half the run time. And in a silent hack/loud run situation, they
take around 15% of the time hacking the objectives and can spend the rest of
their spotlight time helping out in physical combat.
