---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Nevertwinter: Heir of Delzoun"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-neverwinter-delzoun-heir.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Delzoun was the ancient dwarven empire that flourished at around the same time
as the other ancient empires of the region. Being underground, it managed to
survive the fall of Netheril relatively unscathed and last a few more centuries.

They had several underground cities in the area, but their grand capital of
Gauntlgrym was the most majestic and famous. It started out as a mining
complex. Eventually its workers Delved Too Greedily and Too Deep, and found a
slumbering primordial: Maegera the Inferno.

Luck was on the dwarves' side, and they managed to avoid waking Maegera up. Some
time later, Delzoun's leadership would make a deal with the archmage who ruled
over the city of Illusk, founded by Netheril survivors. Combining their
technical and magical expertise, they built a geothermal power generator around
Maegera's prison, using her as the heat source. This brought both civilizations
great prosperity, for a time.

Eventually, Illusk was razed and Gauntlgrym suffered the fate of all dwarven
fortresses, falling to an orcish invasion. Over the following years the orcs
would be displaced by humans, the humans by mind flayers, and then the city
would fall out of history and into myth. Today, Gauntlgrym is seen like a sort
of dwarven Atlantis - no dwarf alive knows where it was located, but many dream
of finding it and unearthing its riches.

A few years ago, though, an incredible event happened: a number of dwarves
throughout the world started receiving visitations from ghosts clad in the
ancient garb of Delzoun. The ghosts warned these distant descendants of theirs
that a great and terrible beast (spoiler: it's Maegera) was about to awaken in
the site of ancient Gauntlgrym, and that this must not be allowed to pass. They
plead with these descendants to find the city and prevent the awakening. This
provoked a sort of "gold rush" to find the city, which died down after a few
more years of no one finding it.

The PC is one of the dwarves visited by the ghost of their ancestor, one who
hasn't given up the search. They dream of finding their city, reclaiming their
ancient birthright, and elevating their family name to its rightful place among
their people's legends. Oh, and of preventing the world-ending disaster that
would happen if this mysterious beast awakens. Strike the Earth!

There are no class prerequisites here, but as a true heir of Delzoun the PC must
be a dwarf. The associated background skills are Dungeoneering and History.

## Features

These generally make you dwarfier than your typical dwarf.

Your starting feature makes you even more resistant to poison, granting you (5 +
half level) poison resistance.

At level 5, you gain an extra healing surge.

At level 10, you gain a +4 bonus to Diplomacy, Bluff and Intimidate when
interacting with other dwarves.

## Optional Powers

These continue the theme of the features, making you tougher or more skilled in
dwarven lore.

**Scholar of Ancient Ways** is a level 2 encounter power that lets you roll a
History check in place of any other INT-based skill check, or a Dungeoneering
check in place of any other WIS-based skill check. Because all things are like
dwarf fortresses if you look at them the right way.

**Noble Indomitability** is a level 6 encounter power that works as an
interrupt. When you're subject to forced movement, you can use it to spend a
healing surge and completely negate that movement.

**Body Over Mind** is a level 10 encounter power that can be used when you fail
a saving throw. It lets you spend a healing surge to succeed at that throw
instead.

## Impressions

These powers and features are excellent for all types of defenders, but they can
help a dwarf of any class become even more survivable. I know this is one of the
themes that locks you into a single ancestry, but it would be quite funny to
have a non-dwarf PC who is a true heir because they were adopted into a dwarven
family that can trace their line to Delzoun. If I was trying to make Carrot
Ironfoundersson as a 4e PC, I'd give him this theme.

Story-wise, this is probably the best way to involve your party in the search
for Gauntlgrym. It's easy to justify multiple PCs having it, and you could build
a campaign around an all-Heir party.
