---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Corellon Domain"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

In the default 4e setting, Corellon is the universal god of spring, beauty and
the arts, and also the patron of arcane magic. In Forgotten Realms, his original
setting, he is the head of the elven pantheon. His portfolion includes all of
the above plus nature, war, and most other things elves care about. All of his
worshippers are elves or eladrin.

Warpriests of Corellon are known as Fey Wardens, and take it as their holy
mission to both protect elves and their culture, and also promote and spread the
greatness of that culture. I don't think he wants non-elves to worship him, he
just wants non-elves to know elves are better than them.

The stats for this domain can also be used for priests of other elven gods.

## Mechanics

Most other Warpriest domains are melee-only, but Corellon's weapon powers can be
used with either melee or ranged weapons. This means the theme is designed to
take advantage of the racial weapon proficiencies elves and eladrin get, and is
particularly suited to moon or sun elves who replace Eladrin Education with Elf
Weapon Proficiency. They get proficiency with both the long sword and the long
bow.

In addition to its ranged attack emphasis, the domain's powers also focus on
granting extra mobility to the cleric's allies, with a secondary focus on making
enemies easier to hit by either nullifying cover or granting allies combat
advantage.

The old character optimization forums say this is the domain that relies on
Constitution the least, so players are free to put those points on Dexterity
instead, particularly if they plan on favoring ranged combat or wearing light
armor.

I'm not going to cover all of the powers in detail here, but I think the
domain's two at-wills are fun. Both are melee or ranged weapon attacks using
Wisdom vs. AC and dealing 1W + Wis mod damage. **Blessing of the Wild** lets the
cleric or an ally within 5 squares shift 1 square as a free action, and
**Graceful Switch** lets them stow a weapon and draw another as a free action
before making the attack. The latter also deals force and radiant damage, so the
cleric is never without something that can put the hurt on incorporeal undead.

## Impressions

I really like the mechanical aspect of this domain, though I'm not a big fan of
the "elves are better than everyone else" mentality in its lore. It's quite easy
to remove, though.

This domain's powers would be very well suited to a core deity like Avandra,
with their flexibility and focus on mobility.
