---
layout: post
title: "Let's Play Hell's Rebels: Devils and other Fiends"
tags:
    - lets-play
    - hells-rebels
    - gm-hat
    - gurps
    - pathfinder
    - dnd
---

My recent adaptation efforts for that Hell's Rebels campaign had me going on a
spelunking expedition about fiend stats in D&D. Here's what I found out, and
what I intend to do about it on this GURPS adaptation.

For our purposes here, "fiend" refers to all of the monsters that originate from
the "evil planes" of the D&D universe: demons, devils, daemons, and
others. "Fiend" was the only general term left, so we're using it in this post.

## Fiends in D&D

D&D's fiend situation is one of the most egregious examples of its tendency
towards overly-complicated taxonomies[^1]. Every synonym becomes the name of a
distinct type of monster with stats that differ from those of the rest.

The real purpose of the divide here seems to be mechanical: in most editions
each type has a different lengthy list of weaknesses and resistances that seems
calculated to confuse players. Things that are good against devils are bad
against demons and vice-versa - if the PCs guess wrong, they're in trouble. The
specifics here change from edition to edition.

Lore-wise, early editions made a big deal out of the fact that devils were
Lawful Evil and demons Chaotic Evil. Later ones tried to elaborate on it and
find more ways to explain that the two alignments were different at a
fundamental cosmic level. Pathfinder really doubles down on that, trying to find
additional themes for every fiend type it presents.

Pathfinder 1e, which is what we're interested in, has this configuration for the
mechanical bits:

- Demons are immune to lightning; Devils take normal damage from it.

- Devils are immune to fire; Most demons are merely resistant to it.

- They're equally resistant to acid and cold.

- They're both immune to poison.

- They're resistant to weapon attacks unless the weapon is Good-aligned _or_
  made from a special material. For demons, that's cold iron; for devils,
  silver. Powerful specimens have resistance that can only be bypassed by
  weapons fulfilling both the alignment and material requirements.

This is about as complex to describe as it was in previous editions, but it's
actually much easier to completely bypass due to the combinatorial explosion in
spells and magical effects available to players compared to AD&D.

After the first couple of levels you can forget about the materials requirement
entirely, because you'll have access to Align Weapon or the Holy enchantment. By
the time you're fighting those stronger fiends, you'll probably have a +3 weapon
in hand, which also bypasses both material requirements. And as for elemental
damage types, this is the edition that introduces sonic damage, which damages
both demons and devils normally. It also makes it quite easy for a character to
swap all of their spells' damage to sonic[^2].

## Fiends In Dungeon Fantasy

Dungeon Fantasy is a lot simpler. Demon is one of the big monster categories in
the game, and all demons come from the area colloquially known as Hell. The
specifics are left as an exercise to the GM.

Belonging to the Demon category makes them immune to magic that affects the
minds of natural creatures and susceptible to magic that affects spirits in
general or demons in particular. They don't count as "alive" for spells that
strictly require living targets but always count as "evil" for spells and
abilities that affect evil creatures.

Most notably, they do not have any universal resistances to elemental damage or
mundane weapons. Each demon "species", other than the very weakest ones, does
have additional defenses. Most take damage as normal but can only _die_ if a
specific condition is met. They also often lack some or all of the weak points
of natural creatures, such as blood and vital organs.

Gaming Ballistic's _Nordlond Bestiary_ does include some demons that are direct
adaptations of D&D fiends, but only the most powerful of them (the Balor and Pit
Fiend equivalents) have resistances that resemble Pathfinder's to any degree.

## What Will I Do in Hell's Rebels?

If I was starting this project way back in 2017, I'd probably be gearing up to
convert every devil that appeared in Hell's Rebels to GURPS. But since this is
2023, I don't have to!

I have _plenty_ of first- and third-party Dungeon Fantasy books now, and between
them I have more than enough stat blocks available that I can just pick whatever
looks closer to the original monster and use that.

This does mean that I'm going to end up ignoring a lot of the default D&D
cosmology and lore when picking my monsters. "Demon" and "devil" are once again
synonyms - there is no fundamental cosmic difference between them. They all come
from the same place. Any differences, if they ever become relevant, are
political rather than taxonomical.

We're also ignoring the difference between Lawful Evil and Chaotic Evil because
1) there is no alignment in GURPS DF and 2) it's a bit nonsensical anyway. In
fact, _Pathfinder itself_ is going to get rid of alignment in its upcoming
revised second edition, which was motivated by an attempt to rid itself of all
remaining ties to the OGL after this January's brouhaha.

The game's existing rules should suffice to determine whether something counts
as "holy"/"good" or "unholy"/"evil" for game purposes. This is a similar
approach to what I hear PF 2.5 is going to take.

[^1]: Another famous one is incorporeal undead. Is that thing a wraith, a
    specter, a shade, or a ghost?

[^2]: That's assuming they want to fight fair in the first place instead of
    casting one of this edition's many instant fight-enders.
