---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Iron Circle"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

This is another Vale-specific faction, one with strong ties to a published
adventure.

## The Lore

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-iron-circle-tar-devil.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The Iron Circle is a large band of evil mercenaries whose main base operation
lies south of the Nentir Vale in the city of Sarthel. They're led by a man named
Lord Vhennyk and are faithful worshipers of Asmodeus. As an organization their
ultimate goal is to conquer the world in the name of Hell. Given what we've read
about devils and Hell in past projects, that likely makes them the militarized
faction in the Vale most deserving of the label "fascist".

Vhennyk wishes to conquer the Vale as part of his overall world domination goal,
and has begun sending his forces to the barony of Harkenwold, near the Vale's
southern border, likely because he believes it to be especially vulnerable.

Vhennyk himself remains far away in Sarthel. He's delegating this invasion to
Nazin Redthorn, one of his captains. Redthorn is recently arrived at the Vale
and has been tasked with stepping up operations and upgrading the espionage
campaign the Circle has on Harkenwold into an overt invasion. Val Esed is the
spymaster in charge of the current efforts, and she's been feeding information
on the Vale's inhabitants and defenses to the Circle for a while now.

The Iron Circle is the major antagonist in the _Reavers of Harkenwold_ two-part
adventure that comes with the Dungeon Master's Kit boxed set. The Kit was the
main GMing aid for the Essentials line, and was sold at the same time as
Threats. This book really wants you to get that box, so it avoids spoilers for
_Reavers_ and recommends you to leave the named leaders out of any home-grown
adventures until you can buy and read it (cha-ching!).

The Iron Circle is shown here as it was shortly before the start of _Reavers_,
so they're still mostly focused on spying and reconnaissance, moving discreetly
in small groups and avoiding openly showing their symbols. Soldiers openly
wearing their colors are known mostly as slightly creepy foreign
mercenaries. Their spying does not restrict itself to Harkenwold, but also
touches upon the elves of Harken forest (whether they belong to Harken's Heart
or not) and on the Daggerburg Goblins.

The Circle's spellcasters all use infernal magic, and have a particular affinity
for summoning Tar Devils. These creatures are so named because they constantly
secrete tar from their skins, and they love acting as guards and extra muscle
for Circle detachments. They usually wear little clothing and use exotic
weapons.

## The Numbers

We get stats here for all the types of unit that make up the Iron Circle's
roster, but as mentioned before the book avoids statting up important named NPCs
that have roles in _Reavers_.

The majority of the Circle's mortal agents are human, but sympathetic people
from other races are also accepted as members. You can use any other stat blocks
from the MMs (humans, elves, dwarves, other species) as members of the
circle. Circle members have no common traits, so you don't need to do much
reskinning for them.

Tar Devils are Medium Immortal Humanoids with Fire Resistance 10 and Acid
Vulnerability 5. Maybe acid interacts badly with the tar?

### Iron Circle Brigand

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-iron-circle-brigand.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The most basic and numerous soldier of the Circle uses this stat block. As the
name implies, they're definitely not above engaging in a little banditry. These
are Level 1 Soldiers with 28 HP. They're well-equipped with scale armor, shield,
mace, crossbow and a fancy black cloak with the Circle's emblem (a circle made
of chains) embroidered on it.

The **mace** and **crossbow** provide the soldier with basic melee and ranged
attacks. They can also use the mace to **Drive Back** an enemy, dealing the same
damage as a basic attack, pushing the target 1 square, and shifting 1 square to
follow. Their **Relentless Assault** trait acts as an aura (1) that deals 3
damage to any enemy inside that makes an attack that doesn't target the brigand.

Brigands probably like to gang up on defenders and melee strikers, since most of
those PCs' attacks are single-target and will trigger Relentless Assault on all
the other brigands not targeted.

### Iron Circle Dark Adept

This infernalist spellcaster is a Level 3 Controller with the Leader keyword and
46 HP. They fight in melee with a **Dark Dagger** that deals fire damage and
slides 3 squares on a hit. At range they can use an area attack named **Dark
Tendrils** that deals fire damage, slows, and makes targets grant combat
advantage for a turn. It's not selective, so it can cause friendly fire
incidents.

The adept's leaderly power is **Dark Imperative**, a minor action that recharges
when they're first bloodied. It targets an ally and lets them slide that ally 3
squares. The ally gains 10 temporary HP, and while those last their attacks all
deal an extra 3 necrotic damage. Great to place skirmishers behind PC lines.

### Tar Devil Harrier

These tar devils are Level 3 Artillery with 36 HP. They fight with a **Kukri**
up close but prefer to hang back and throw **tar balls** that deal fire damage,
slow and deal 2 ongoing damage (save ends both). If surrounded they can produce
a **Fuming Cloud** (encounter) that deals fire damage and creates a zone that
lasts the rest of the encounter. The zone provides concealment and deals 2 fire
damage to any creature ending their turn inside.

### Tar Devil Brawler

This one likes to fight with using its secreted tar as a weapon. It's a Level 3
Brute with 53 HP. Its **Tar Splatter** acts like an aura (1) that prevents
enemies who start their turns inside from shifting that turn. It attacks with
**slams** that deal fire damage, and with **Tar Strikes** (recharge 5+) that
deals heavy fire damage, immobilizes, and inflicts ongoing 5 fire damage (save
ends both).

### Tar Devil Guard

This Level 4 Soldier has 53 HP and wields a **khopesh** in combat. The **hot
reek** of its tar acts as an aura (1) that deals 2 fire damage to any enemy that
starts their turn inside, and also prevents them from shifting that turn. It can
also toss a **tar net** out to Range 5, targeting Reflex. A hit deals fire
damage, restrains (save ends), and lets the devil pull the target up to 4
squares to a square adjacent to it.

### Iron Circle Spy

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-iron-circle-spy.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Spies are among the most well-trained mortal agents of the Circle current in the
area. They wear no identifying marks, and pose as normal travelers or
inhabitants of Harkenwold's many small communities. Spies are Level 4 Lurkers
with 44 HP. When pressed into a fight, they use **short swords** in melee and
blasts of **infernal fire** at range. Both are basic attacks.

Spies can cloak themselves in a **Veil of Shadows**, creating a zone that lasts
for a turn and blocks line of sight for everyone except for the spy. They can
also imbue their swords with flame for an **Infernal Strike**. This is twice as
strong as a basic strike and deals fire damage, half on a miss. Using one of
these two powers recharges the other, so there's your lurker loop.

If an enemy uses a power that inflicts forced movement on the spy while it's
inside the Veil of Shadows, the spy can use **Diabolical Dodge** to make a free
basic attack against that enemy and shift up to 2 squares to another square
inside the zone, all as an interrupt.

### Iron Circle Commander

This _might_ apply to Nazin Redthorn, or it might be one of the officers under
his command. I haven't read Reavers yet! Anyway, commanders are Level 5 Elite
Soldiers with the Leader tag and 126 HP. They wield **flails** with great
skill.

Aside from basic attacks, they can use a **Devil's Tactics** at-will maneuver
that does the same damage, makes the target grant combat advantage for a turn on
a hit, and lets an enemy within 5 squares make a free basic attack against the
target as an effect. If an enemy leaves a square adjacent to the commander, it
can use **Tripping Flail** as an opportunity action to attack their Reflex and
knock them prone on a hit.

Once per encounter the commander can unleash a selective blast of **Infernal
Flames**, which deal fire damage and daze on a hit (save ends). Allies in the
blast gain 5 temporary HP.

## Final Impression

Unlike Dythan's Legion or the Gray Company, which can take a while to become
active, the Iron Circle is poised to be an immediate threat to starting
characters and to the Vale, which is exactly what happens in Reavers of
Harkenwold.

If left unopposed, they might end up pressganging the Daggerburg Goblins (as
someone in the RPG.net thread mentioned shortly before I wrote this), and might
even link up with the Shadow Court over in Fallcrest to grab information about
the city before moving against it in force. The Shadow Court entry gave me the
impression the Circle wouldn't have a use for the tiefling gang, but it turns
out they would neatly slot into each other's plans.

It was pointed out to me that the Shadow Court could be seen as embodying
several unfortunate antisemitic tropes. One way to avoid that would be to not
make them a spy ring working for the Iron Circle from the start, to have a
more diverse membership than just tieflings, and to completely remove all the
text about their recruiting practices.

Of the groups we saw so far, the druids of Harkens Heart would have cause to
oppose the Circle's advances into their woods, but would have little ability or
desire to fight them outside. The Daggerburg goblins would of course resist
being pressed into service to them, and might either have a good shot at
succeeding, or might need PC help depending on your campaign goals.

The Gravelstokes might work for the Circle if the money is right, but if you
keep the level disparity they'll most likely adopt a wait and see approach
before deigning to offer their services. PCs who can scrape together their
ruinous fees might turn things around and hire the assassin family to strike the
Iron Circle's leadership instead!

The Hunter Spiders would ignore all of these surfacer conflicts unless they give
them more opportunities to grab slaves to aid in their search.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
