---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Xinlenal and Related Locations"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

This post covers the city itself and several nearby locations related to the
Gray Wolf Uthgardt, who serve the Netherese.

## Content Warning: "Brutal Savages" nonsense

There is a lot of Gray Wolf material in this section, and this is where the
mounting inconsistencies in their portrayal start to get in the way. The stuff
about them that I read so far gave me the impression of a people who were mostly
minding their own business before the Netherese turned their leaders into
fascist assholes. Most of the actual tribe members were not happy with the
situation: a significant number of them had defected, and those who hadn't were
open to persuasion by a PC like the Pack Outcast.

This section drops most of that and goes all in on the "brutal savages who
disdain civilization" cliches, painting the Gray Wolf as being bad guys even
before the Netherese got to them. After being co-opted, they got even worse.
Anyone who's still a member of the tribe at this point is either on board with
the cruelty or too cowardly to ever stand against it. Even their guardian
spirits are disgusted with them.

I'm going to report what the book says below, but I personally would completely
change it were I to run a Neverwinter campaign.

## Xinlenal From the Outside In

As we saw before, Xinlenal wasn't just a Netherese flying city, it was the first
ever built. It fell here in the Wood when Netheril's magic stopped
working. Today, when viewed from the outside, it looks like an out-of-place
60-foot tall plateau jutting up from the ground in an otherwise flat area of the
Wood. The structures atop it are hidden from view by the Wood's vegetation,
which grew over it in the two millennia since the city crashed. The Shadovar led
by Prince Clariburnus use Xinlenal as their main base of operations in the
region, and are hard at work trying to make it fly again.

### The Forest of Hides

The Gray Wolf recognize this is the center of Netherese power even though they
don't know what goes on in here. So when they declared war on the Forsworn, they
started hanging up the skins of their "traitorous kinfolk" in a clearing outside
the plateau. This acts as both a warning to enemies and as a show of support for
their new masters.

Ironically, the sheer brutality of this practice has led many rank-and-file Gray
Wolf to question their leadership, and the horrible smell of dead werewolf
lingering about the place acts as a cover for Forsworn spies and makes it easier
for them to scout the plateau.

The act of building the Forest of Hides outraged and horrified many of the
primal spirits who used to be friends of the Grey Wolf. If the Pack Outcast,
Uthgardt Barbarian, or any other PC who uses primal powers dismantle the Forest
of Hides, those spirits will reward them with a daily power named **Wrath of the
Fallen**, which can be activated after an attack hits and makes the target
vulnerable 5 to all damage (save ends), including that of the triggering
attack. Once the target saves, they take another 10 damage.

Here you see the first instance of what I talked about in the intro paragraphs
above. There's more below.

### The City and the Web of Stone

The walls of the plateau are a sheer climb, but they look natural after two
millennia of weathering. Some flying monsters even made lairs there. The city at
the top looks completely ruined when viewed from the plateau's edge.

Those moving towards the center will soon spot a massive suspended "web" made of
stone looming over the skyline. This acts as a gigantic crane and construction
tool used in the Shadovar's renovation efforts. It can lift whole city blocks
for relocation, or remove an equivalent quantity of soil and vegetation to
reveal the structures buried beneath. Workers both organic and artificial are
constantly swarming all over it.

This web was built by the shadar-kai witch Korvina, who realized she could use
residual energy from the city's old protection rituals to power it. Later she
would find out she was actually drawing power from the city's broken mythallar
and delaying its repairs. When her bosses found out about the oopsie, she
managed to pin the blame for it on her colleague Qualthus, whose fate we'll
learn in a future post.

### The Womb of Stone

Gee, these Netherese sure have a knack for naming things, don't they?

This building is an ancient construct factory reactivated by the Shadovar. This
is where they build all the thaalud constructs they're using as a workforce. The
ones they build today aren't as powerful as the ones from ancient Netheril
(using the thaalud constructor stat block from earlier in this book), but they
can do their job just fine.

The Womb of Stone is run and operated by a shade named Ulrukan (stats as a human
slaver with shade traits). His left arm and leg are animated prosthetic
constructs, which I think is awesome. Ulrukan discovered the problem with the
Web of Stone before anyone else, decided to keep it to himself until he could
gain something by revealing it, and lost the chance to do so when other people
found the issue and reported it immediately. Now that it's public he's trying to
figure out how to extract some advantage from the fact that he knew it before
anyone else did. I don't think he knows it's Korvina's fault, or he'd already be
blackmailing her.

### Cathedral of Night

This is a ancient building repurposed as a temple to the goddess Shar. The
exterior is still ruined and worn, but the interior is very fancy and all done
up in onyx and jet. It's also protected by enchanted hungry shadows, a very
interesting hazard that can temporarily remove PCs from play and cause ongoing
psychic and necrotic damage to them while they're gone. This security protects
the usual temple treasures and also a portal to the Shadowfell, which is used by
the Shadovar to access their supply routes.

Orthinos Eln is the priest in charge of both the temple and the restoration
project. He can be found here either meditating or communing with his boss
Prince Clariburnus, who leads the faction as a whole.

### Xinlenal's Heart

The city's _mythallar_ is located at its very center. The tower that houses it
was the first building to be completely restored, and a small army of Shadovar
artificers is now busy restoring the artifact itself.

The restoration process is simple to describe but very hard to execute. It
consists of mixing melted glass with large quantities of residuum, carefully
pouring the resulting substance over the _mythallar_, and molding it so that it
slowly recovers its original spherical shape. Right now it looks like a partial
sphere, already over 100 feet (30 meters!) in diameter.

This is why the Netherese are scouring the region's many ruins and dungeons for
magic items and other ancient enchanted relics, and also why they're poised to
begin raiding Neverwinter. All of that loot is going to get destroyed for its
residuum. The Shadovar are burning the legacies of others to rebuild their own.

The central tower is also where their main war room is located, as well as
Clariburnus' quarters and throne room. He can either be found here coordinating
the faction's overall strategy, or somewhere out in the world leading another
raid for magic items. He also sometimes brings members of the Gray Wolf
leadership here for briefings.

## Vellosk

This is the main "settlement" of the Gray Wolf tribe, located in the Wood away
from Xinlenal. The quotes are there because they are mostly nomadic, and this is
just where a few more permanent structures are built - pack leader's homes, a
feast hall, and some other communal buildings. You can also find a number of
tents and lean-tos scattered around the area, belonging to other tribe members
who are currently staying there.

The book says the Grey Wolf have the technology to make weapons and tools as
sophisticated as that of Neverwinter, but that they have no real culture to
speak of beyond an obsession with behaving like D&D's idea of a wolf pack. It
could be that this is what the current leadership thinks, but the way the book
phrases it kinda makes me think this is what they were like even before.

Vellosk's central feature is a sloped pit whose bottom is coated in dry bones,
and also contains a totem pole decorated with animal skulls. This is their
center of worship, dedicated to Uthgar and the tribe's guardian spirits. It's
also where ritual combats and duels happen.

One of the permanent structures here is the home of Ormshas, a dark creeper
necromancer who is here officially as a Netherese ambassador and in reality as a
spy placed to make sure the Grey World remain under control. She has a large
group of wraiths under her control, which she uses to uncover secrets and
silence dissenters.

### The Gray Wolf and the PCs

A lot of the rank-and-file Grey Wolf are very unhappy with the direction the
tribe is taking, but they also believe their leaders' commands are absolute and
those leaders have been completely bought the Netherese party line. Many tribe
members would rather leave than try to challenge their leaders, but these days
those who express a desire to leave are executed on the spot.

PCs such as the Pack Outcast or the Uthgardt Barbarian would have an easier time
convincing the Grey Wolf to reject their leadership, but they would still need
to challenge those leaders to ritual combat and win (or convince/help a friendly
Gray Wolf to do so). Ritual combat is, of course, to the death.

Making a legitimate challenge would also require convincing a majority of the
tribe that their leaders are being bamboozled by the Netherese. Just going for
the leaders at once is a sure way to get the whole tribe to declare war on you
no matter what they think about those leaders, so it's not a good option for
most groups.

## Conyberry

Conyberry is a small village at the edge of the Wood that became quite scenic
during the Spellplague when a populated slice of Abeir was isekaied there. It
gained a new lake, a bunch of floating earthmotes, and a mixed population that
learned to live well together after some initial friction.

Unfortunately you don't get to see that version of it, because the Grey Wolf
killed everyone long before the Netherese even got to them. According to the
book they believed the people from Abeir to be hostile invaders and the people
of Conyberry to be their co-conspirators.

The Gray Wolf used the now empty village as a storage area for a time. No one
else went there because everyone (rightly) assumed it had been destroyed after
news stopped coming, and when someone did stumble into the place they were
killed.

When the Netherese recruited them they started using the village to, in the
words of the book, "practice civilized behavior" so that they would blend into
the communities they were ordered to infiltrate. Now when outsiders end up there
by accident they're received by a bunch of Gray Wolf in sheep's clothing eager
to test their acting skills. Only after the actors are satisfied, or when
they're found out, do the murder attempts start.

## Impressions

Xinlenal itself seems like a good dungeon location. A final battle against
Caliburnus in the _mythallar_ chamber would look awesome.

But everything about the description of the Gray Wolf kinda ruins it. The text
is filled with the exact set of racist tropes that draw so much criticism to
D&D. I'm left with the distinct impression that the Gray Wolf are described as
being bad _because they're tribal_, in contrast to the "civilized" people they
disdain and victimize. Yikes!

That's definitely something I'd completely rewrite if I ever ran a campaign in
this setting. It actually kinda tainted the good memories I had of this book,
and made me stop writing new Let's Read material for it for a while.
