---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: The Ruins of Shandarar"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

## Historical Errata

Before I continue, I feel a correction is in order. This one's on me, not on the
book, since it was a detail from that long and detailed timeline at the start
that I missed. I'm correcting it here because it will be important later.

As we already know, Shandarar was the former capital of Iliyanbruen, an
elven/eladrin empire that existed in this region thousands of years ago. It
coexisted with the human empire of Netheril, and witnessed its fall when the
flying city of Xinlenal fell on the Neverwinter Wood.

The bit I got wrong was this: the fall of Xinlenal did not also cause the end of
Iliyanbruen. The crash site was far from the city, and though the elves explored
it soon after the event they decided to declare it off-limits after the first
few explosions and carried on with their lives.

Iliyanbruen would last for a few centuries longer. They'd manage to repel a
massive orc invasion that covered the North, but their kingdom would collapse
from the effort it spent to kick those same orcs out of the human city of Illusk
(located where Luskan is today). From here on out things proceed as previously
detailed, with the empire's population scattering and some of them deciding to
take refuge in the Feywild.

## Present-Day Shandarar

The middle world ruins of Shandarar cover a sizable area in the Wood but were
mostly hidden by the passage of time and the growth of vegetation. Sometimes a
farmer at the edges of the forest would find shards of pottery as they plowed a
field, or some village builders would end up unearthing a ruined
structure. These rumors helped the Netherese find the core of the ruins and
steal a bunch of ancient relics from it, which has the eladrin in a tizzy as we
already learned.

Most of the ruins are still, well, ruins. They're overgrown and weathered enough
to be hazardous. The oldest part of them, however, is being rebuilt and
renovated by the eladrin, since that's where they crossed over from the Feywild.

The biggest news here is that there are still several shielded vaults in the
ruins that haven't been found out by anyone yet. They contain extensive troves
of ancient Iliyanbruen artifacts and works of art, of immense cultural value
even when they aren't magical, all protected against the ravages of time by
stasis spells. The eladrin themselves don't remember their locations, and this
is the first time the book itself mentions them.

Here is also where it goes into a little more detail on the Feywild side of the
crossing. That's where the military outpost of New Shandarar is. It was also
built on top of ruins, after the eladrin force kicked out the evil fey that had
been living in them.

New Shandarar's fortifications are living vegetation shaped by magic, and the
portal opens into a courtyard kill zone. Aside from all the military defenses
you expect, built of out living and magically reinforced wood, the fort also has
plenty of facilities for long-term habitation. This includes a temple to
Corellon.

## The Hidden Serpent

As we saw before, Merrisara Winterwhite, the force's commanding officer, is part
of their moderate faction. She spends most of her time in the middle world
overseeing the restoration of the city. Her second-in-command is an extremist,
and spends all of his time in the Feywild. Addemios Three-Dawn, the secret
Asmodeus worshiper, also spends all his time in the Feywild. He has a hidden
shrine to his god underneath Corellon's temple. The evil fey who were
supposedly kicked out of the area have a hidden camp not too far from the fort,
and they cooperate with Three-Dawn because their interests align.

A side box here explains that Asmodeus presents himself in the Feywild as a
trickster god of a "better class" than the usual archetypes found there. Instead
of lying and cheating for the lulz, he encourages and teaches his followers to
do so in order to advance their own power and influence.

## The Fey and the PCs

Another box discusses the possible attitudes of the eladrin towards PCs. As we
already known even the moderates are standoffish and aggressive to outsiders by
default. However, they are likely have a more diplomatic stance towards a party
which includes the Iliyanbruen Guardian.

Which of the two sub-factions wins out depends largely on the actions of the
PCs. The moderates win and might become valuable allies if the PCs can offer
them evidence that the Shadovar are responsible for the relic thefts, or if they
can prove Addemios Three-Dawn is a traitor who is manipulating them.

On the other hand, if the PCs steal from the ruins, fight the eladrin or attack
Three-Dawn before proving his guilt, the Fey will adopt the extremist stance and
launch a full-scale invasion of the region, likely starting a major open war
with the other factions.

## Impressions

How important the fey of New Shandarar are depends entirely on what the group
wants for their campaign. They could be anywhere from isolated and irrelevant to
a potential region-wide threat that needs to be defused as soon as
possible. Even groups who aren't interested in spending a lot of time dealing
with these elves might still get an adventure or two out of a visit to their
camp, perhaps as they're traveling the Wood on the way to some other location
therein.
