---
layout: post
date: 2023-09-04 09:00:00 -03:00
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: River District"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
    - neverwinter
---

The River District occupies the city's northeastern quadrant and was where most
of the city's merchant class lived, and also the location of a couple of wizard
towers. These homes were not as nice as those of the Blacklake nobles, but they
were still sturdy and are still mostly standing.

Today's River District is much more dangerous and hostile than Blacklake. The
many guardhouses and security walls here now act as prime ambush spots. It's
protected from the Chasm by the river, but monsters from the wilderness outside
can freely wander in. The main source of danger, however, are the Many-Arrows
Orcs. Neverember has so far failed to dislodge them, and maintains an uneasy
truce punctuated by skirmishes while he thinks of a way to do so.

The Mintarn mercs mostly stay away from the River District, making it a good
place for shady deals if one can dodge the orcs. Hot-blooded youngsters also
love to go here on dares, despite their parents' protestations. And while
scavengers have long taken all of the most obvious treasure, there's still some
left in secret stashes all over those merchant mansions.

## The Fallen Tower

This used to be a wizard's tower, but it was destroyed during the
Spellplague. Some time later, its ruins became a tavern whose main attraction is
the nightly haunt showing the deaths of the wizards as they fall from a great
height into what is now the tavern's cookfire at the center of the common
room. Charming.

The place was vacant when the orcs found it but it still contained a lot of
stored food and drink, so they reopened it for their own use. Lord Neverember
and Commander Vansi have declated The Fallen Tower to be neutral ground, and
their envoys meet here when they have cause to talk. Non-orcs deemed worthy to
share a drink with the Many-Arrows are also allowed to frequent the Tower.

## The Cloak Tower

The Cloak Tower was once the headquarters of a mage guild called The
Many-Starred Cloaks. It vanished into thin air at the height of the Spellplague
and rematerialized six months later at a different address, without its
wizards. People who have tried to explore it in the past were turned away or
killed by its magical wards and traps, and everyone thought the same would
happen to the orcs. However, for some reason, they had absolutely no trouble
moving in and making this tower their home.

## The Shard of Night

This black stone tower appeared high above the River District during the
Spellplague and has floated there ever since. It looks like it was cut off from
its base, with an opening at the bottom. It casts no shadow during the day, and
when people walk under it their own shadows vanish as well. It does cast a
shadow by the light of the moon, and even though no one was ever seen to enter
or leave the place, eerie sounds sometimes echo from it.

The tower used to be part of a distant temple of Sel√ªne, but it was cut off and
banished to the Shadowfell during a Netherese assault on that temple. After the
battle, they found out they could control where the tower appeared in the world,
so they sent it to Neverwinter during the Spellplague and left it there until
the day when it was needed.

Now it is needed, and they're using it. The Shard's enchantments allow it to
absorb shadows during the day and use them to power a teleportation circle
inside that links it to Xinlenal.

Creatures infused with shadow power, such as the Scion of Shadow, are immune to
the absorption effect and still cast shadows while under the Tower. They also
feel a comforting pull from it, which might help clue them in to what lies
inside.

## Impressions

_This_ is the "bad" part of town. I imagine most who live here are either
Many-Arrows, allied with them, or sneaky enough to go undetected. I also think
envoys who want to go to the Fallen Tower for diplomacy with the orcs might need
some sort of token of safe passage, since it's actually quite far from the
district's borders.

Profit-oriented parties could have some interesting adventures following up on
rumors of a big treasure cache still hidden in the River District, but most of
the hooks here involve dealing with the Many-Arrows somehow. Raiding the Shard
of Night is an interesting way to get to Xinlenal without a long and arduous
overland trek into the Woods, but that place is only approachable by "endgame"
parties.
