---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Tigerclaw Barbarians"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-tigerclaw.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

We've heard about these people in several previous entries, and now is the time
to take a more detailed look at them.

## The Lore

The Tigerclaw people claim direct descent from the Hunter of Winter, a powerful
primal spirit in the shape of a sabertooth tiger who roamed the world when it
was young. Their stories tell of Hota Swiftstripe, one of their first
chieftains, who ran into the Hunter while he was tracking a bear near a
glacier. The spirit lashed out with a claw and took out one of Hota's eyes
before he could even blink, but the chieftain proceeded to lure it to a frozen
lake.

The tiger's great weight cracked the ice and caused it to fall in, but Hota fell
compassion for such a great hunter and reached out with his spear to help the
beast get out. The Hunter of Winter told Hota that from that moment on they were
brothers, since Hota bore the Hunter's mark and had saved its life. Hota himself
would be blessed with the blood of the tiger, and so would all his
descendants. When Hota returned to his tribe, he was no longer a human, but one
of the first razorclaw shifters.

All of Hota's descendants were shifters as well, so today the Tigerclaw are
divided into two sub-groups. The Tigerbloods who occupy important roles such as
chieftain, shaman, and several types of elite warrior; and the Tamed,
non-shifters who work as gatherers, artisans and rank-and-file warriors. These
are not quite castes despite being called such by the book: there is a way for
one of the Tamed to become a Tigerblood.

When a Tamed has proven themselves worthy, the tribe's chieftain invokes a rite
of initiation where the candidate must hunt and attempt to subdue a sabertooth
tiger. They must not _kill_ it - this is seen as a grave offense punishable by
death. Those who succeed are elevated to Tigerblood status. While they do not
become shifters themselves, they're paired with a Tigerblood shifter so that
their children are born shifters. There doesn't seem to be any gender-based role
division within the Tigerclaw, or at least the book doesn't mention any. The
important one is the Tigerblood/Tamed distinction.

The Tigerclaw used to live all around the Vale, but were driven north when
Nerath began to encroach on their territory. Chief Scargash's tribe lives in
Winterbole Forest in our present, and has been there for 70 years after
returning from the frozen wastes north of the forest. Presumably there are other
tribes who still live up there. The book says they sometimes kidnap worthy
outsiders as mates to keep their numbers up, or adopt orphans from other
communities for the same reason. The first alternative is a horrible cliche, so
I'd suggest focusing more on the second and saying they also take in willing and
worthy adult outsiders instead of kidnapping them.

That said, the Tigerclaw are usually distrustful of outsiders. They remember
Nerath and the empires that came before, all of whom tried to impose their ways
on their people only to eventually crumble to dust while the Tigerclaw
endured. They consider all "creatures" outside their tribe to be hunters
competing for territory, whether those creatures are monsters or people. These
"competitors" can be negotiated and traded with, but never fully trusted. And if
they threaten the tribe, the Tigerclaw think no more of raiding a human or elven
settlement than they would of cleaning out a nest of snakes or culling an uppity
wolf pack.

Their society also has its own criminals and outlaws, too. Tribe members who
slay their kin or steal from the tribe are either put to death or exiled,
depending on the severity of the crime. Those who are exiled are known as the
Riven. Most of them are quite evil and resort to worship of evil spirits or
demons to survive when cut off from the tribe. While some live as lone hunters,
others band together in marauder groups who make a living raiding both their
former kin and the outsider communities found south of Winterbole.

The largest of these groups is led by a shaman named Shadowfang, who was exiled
for worshipping a giant demon lord named Kostchtie. They are based west of the
Winter River and frequently go south to raid villages and towns. The Lord Warden
of Fallcrest has a standing bounty on Shadowfang's head. The book doesn't
mention whether the people of the Vale distinguish between Riven and standard
Tigerclaw, so you can vary your answer there depending on what sort of story you
want to tell.

Their biggest internal conflict right now comes from the fact that Chief
Scargash and his shamans are making a serious attempt at opening diplomatic
channels to the other sapient inhabitants of Winterbole: the Frost Witches, the
Treants, and Bitterstrike. This appears to be working, but it has the more
traditionalist of the Tigerblood worried because they fear this will make the
Hunter of Winter see them as "soft" and withdraw its gifts. In other words,
they're like fighting and know successful diplomacy will leave them with less
excuses to pick fights.

We already saw how Bitterstrike and the Frost Witches see these attempts, and
we'll look at the treants in a bit.

## The Numbers

We get several stat blocks for Tigerclaw warriors here, spanning most of the
Heroic tier. I'll look at them in order of level.

The stat blocks are either humans or shifters. Shifters get low-light vision and
might have transformation-related abilities that kick in while they're bloodied.

### Tigerclaw Hordling

Likely a Tamed warrior of no particular distinction, this human is a Level 3
Minion Skirmisher. They attack with a battleaxe that crits on a 18-20, though
the damage increase from the critical is not spectacular since this is still a
minion.

### Tigerclaw Brave

This human is a skilled warrior, which means they might one day undergo the
Tigerblood initiation ritual. They're a Level 3 Soldier with 49 HP.

Braves fight with a **Broadsword** in melee and throw  **Sabertooth Spears** at
range (they carry 2). The sword makes basic attacks that mark for a turn on a
hit. The spear targets Reflex and immobilizes for a turn on a hit. On a miss it
deals half damage and slows for a turn. This is not an at-will attack: it
recharges when the brave is bloodied.

If a marked enemy adjacent to the brave shifts, they can use a **Sabertooth
Jab** to make a free sword attack against them.

### Tigerclaw Scout

This is a shifter, which means they're definitely a Tigerblood. They're also a
Level 4 Skirmisher with 55 HP.

The scout is an **Adept Charger**, which means they're not limited to taking
only free actions after a charge. Their **Razorclaw Flurry** power gives them a
+2 bonus to Speed and a +4 to defenses against opportunity attacks while
bloodied.

Scouts fight with paired **Light Picks**, meant to invoke the image of a
sabertooth tiger's fangs. They do an extra die of damage if used on a charge,
and can use a power named **Sabertooth Strike** to attack two different targets
at once. This recharges as long as at least one of the attacks misses.

If an enemy ends its movement in a square where it flanks the scout, the scout
can use **Wild Instinct** as a reaction to shift 2 squares.

### Tigerclaw Fang-Wielder

This shifter is a Level 5 Brute with 77 HP. They use a **heavy war pick**, whose
attacks to extra damage while they're bloodied. It can also be used in a **Fang
of the Sabertooth** maneuver (recharge 5+), which does heavy damage, knocks
prone, and on a critical hit inflicts 5 ongoing damage (save ends).

When the Fang-Wielder first becomes bloodied, they use a reaction named
**Winter's Rage**, which is an attack on a Close Burst 1 that damages and knocks
prone on a hit, does half damage on a miss, and pushes 1 square as an effect.

Fang-Wielders want to charge right in and actually like getting surrounded by
melee PCs, because all of their best traits kick in when they're bloodied.

### Tigerclaw Shaman

These shifters act as spiritual advisors and general spellcasters for the
Tigerclaw. They're Level 5 Controllers with 52 HP. In combat they use a
**Longspear** and some mind-affecting magic.

This includes the **Phantom Fangs** at-will spell, which on a hit does psychic
damage and immobilizes for a turn, and on a miss slows for a turn. It also
includes the **Concussive Roar** encounter power, a minor action that attacks a
Close Blast 3 and on a hit pushes targets 3 squares and immobilizes them. On a
miss it pushes 1 square instead, but in either case it does no damage.

### Sabertooth Tiger

Yes, as implied in the lore the Tigerclaw make use of sabertooth tigers as
pets. Tigerblood candidates have to tame a wild tiger as part of their
initiation, and I imagine they also breed and raise tigers to accompany
hereditary Tigerbloods. An encounter involving Tigerclaw members is also likely
to involve these beasties.

Sabertooth Tigers are Large Natural Beasts with the Mount keyword and Level 6
Soldiers with 72 HP. They have a ground speed of 8 and a climb speed of 4. Their
**Charging Pounce** trait works like the scout's Adept Charger, letting them
make any type of action after a charge. And their **Tiger Charge** trait gives a
+2 damage bonus to the charge attacks of their rider.

Their **bites** do extra damage on a charge, and grab on a hit (escape DC
15). If the tiger has a grabbed victim, it can only bite that victim. It can
also use **Puncturing Fangs** against them. This hits automatically, does some
physical damage, and inflicts ongoing 5 damage (save ends).

Tigers are higher level than most of the humanoids in this entry, but this is
not a problem because ever since the Monster Vault mount monsters no longer have
to be of equal or lower level than their riders. You can safely drop this
restriction from all older monsters as well.

Tigers want to charge in, grab someone, and keep using Puncturing Fangs on
them, preferrably while their rider attacks.

### Scargash, Tigerclaw Chief

Scargash seems to be a fairly typical Tigerclaw chief as far as stats go. You
could use the same stats for chiefs of other tribes if any appear in your
game. He's a shifter, of course, and a Level 6 Elite Brute with the Leader tag
and 176 HP.

Scargash gains a +2 bonus to all of his defenses while bloodied, and his
leadership style expresses itself as an aura (5) named **Encircle the Prey**,
which grants allies +2 to damage on attacks against targets they are flanking.

His **War Pick** inflicts ongoing damage on a hit and can be used in a **Double
Attack**. If both of those attacks hit the target also suffers a -2 penalty to
all defenses.

His encounter power is a **Staggering Swipe** that damages the target and does
half damage on a miss. As an _effect_, it also slides the target 3 squares to a
space adjacent to one or more other enemies. Those enemies take an automatic 10
damage and fall prone as the flung target bowls into them.

### Primal Sabertooth Tiger

The kind of majestic mount a Tigerclaw chief would ride into battle. They could
be extraordinary mundane specimens, but are likely somehow blessed by the Hunter
in Winter either naturally or via Tigerclaw rituals. Primal sabertooths are Huge
Natural Beasts with the Mount keyword and Level 8 Elite Soldiers with 178 HP.

They have the same Charging Pounce trait as their smaller relatives, and also
have Threatening Reach 2. Their basic attack is a Reach 2 **Claw** that damages
and inflicts 5 ongoing damage. If the target was already taking ongoing damage,
this inflicts 10 ongoing damage instead. This means that a second claw attack on
the same target will worsen their ongoing damage, or that a first attack will
already inflict the worse condition if the target was taking ongoing 5 damage
from another source.

The primal tiger's **Bite** is a minor action. It does light damage and grabs
with escape DC 20. The tiger can pull the victim along when it moves without
provoking opportunity attacks from the victim. Only one victim may be grabbed at
a time.

Their special attack is **Go For the Kill** (recharge 5+), which targets Reflex,
deals heavy damage, knocks prone, and gives the tiger 5 temporary HP if the
attack bloodies the victim.

When the tiger hits 0 HP, it can shift its speed and use Go For The Kill one
last time. If this reduces the target to 0 HP, the tiger heals back to 20 HP
instead of dying. This ability, called **Fierce Spirit**, is an encounter power,
so the tiger can't use it again in the same fight.

## Final Impressions

The book uses the word "barbarian" a lot, but I've avoided doing it here. I
suppose they're barbarians in the D&D class sense, but I wouldn't want to use
the rest of that word's baggage with them. And if I included the Tigerclaw in a
game, I'd definitely remove the bit where they raid other communities for
"worthy mates". It's still a bad trope no matter how you look at it.

Removing that shitty trope leaves you with a fairly complex people as far as D&D
cultures go. They're not likely to be very friendly to outsider PCs, but they
have good reasons for their suspicion. Outsiders can still interact with them in
peaceful ways with a bit of work, and they would make a good origin culture for
martial or primal PCs.

If Bitterstrike decides to go a-conquering, she'll want to force Scargash's
tribe to act as her front-line troops. I imagine their traditionalists will
welcome this since it will mean an end to diplomacy followed by lots of battles,
but most of the tribe would resent serving under the dragon and/or being
manipulated by Frost Witches who would surely be the secret instigators of the
whole thing. They're the first troops you fight, but they're also the weak link
you work in order to dismantle the Army of Winter.

Shadowfang's bunch makes for a much less ambiguous enemy faction, but PCs who
like to go for the diplomatic solution would still have plenty to do in a
scenario where the people of Winterhaven and Fallcrest had trouble telling them
apart from other Tigerclaw and directed their enmity at all of them.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
