---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Frost Witches"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-frost-witches.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

This is another Vale-specific faction, and a cool one.

## The Lore

The Winterbole forest takes up nearly the entire northern edge of the Vale. This
snowy conifer forest is home to several different factions that exist in uneasy
equilibrium, and the Frost Witches are one of the most powerful.

The Witches worship the primordial Cryonax, one of the Evil Elemental Princes,
but no one outside their group knows about this. To most other inhabitants of
the Vale they're "merely" scary forest witches who manipulate and terrify others
for their own benefit.

The Frost Witches count elves, humans, harpies and gnomes among their
number. Every one of them knows how to use magic, and the vast majority are
female. They increase their numbers mostly through active recruiting, which
might mean kidnapping children from communities bordering the woods as often as
it means inducting consenting adults into the coven. Their leader is the elf
witch Clenderi, which rules the group with absolute authority second only to
Cryonax himself.

The Witches are spread out through the whole Winterbole forest, in scattered
huts housing either lone individuals or small groups of less than half a
dozen. Their central headquarters is known simply as "Cold Camp", and it's
important not only because it's Clenderi's home but also because it houses the
source of their power, an artifact known as the Cold Cauldron.

The Cauldron is entirely made of ice, and a frozen flame burns eternally
underneath it. Standing too close to it is hazardous to anyone who's not a
Witch, and it causes a wide area around itself to be covered in frost.

The Witches have no true friends outside their own group. Any alliances they
make with others are opportunistic and likely to be temporary. They are
absolutely willing to turn on these allies if circumstances change.

The Tigerclaw barbarians who also live in the Winterbole forest have been burned
by this enough times that they now attempt to kill any Frost Witches they meet
on sight. The Witches are wary around their territory but don't consider them a
serious threat. They maintain much better relations with the Winterbole treants,
and are engaging on a subtle campaign of manipulation against the dragon
Bitterstrike, intending to eventually convert her to the worship of Cryonax.

## The Numbers

We start off with stats for the Cauldron, which will be relevant to any battle
that happens inside Cold Camp. It's 6 feet in diameter, so you could say it's
Large. Rules-wise it counts as an indestructible terrain feature, emitting an
aura of **Icy Flames** (2) that deals cold damage to any enemy of the Witches
who ends their turn inside. It also turns the terrain inside the whole of Cold
Camp into **Frozen Ground**, which is difficult terrain for anyone without Ice
Walk.

As you might expect, all stat blocks in this entry have Ice Walk and a lot of
cold magic powers, along with resistance to cold and a vulnerability to
fire. They also retain their racial traits, if any.

### Icicle Swarm

This is a Medium swarm of Tiny, sharp ice elementals that the Witches known how
to summon and control. It's a Level 6 Skirmisher with 68 HP and all the standard
swarm traits. Their **Swarm Attack** aura deals 5 cold damage to enemies inside,
and their basic attack is an **Icicle Stab** that deals cold damage, allows them
to shift 2 squares before or after the attack, and immobilizes on a critical hit
(save ends).

### Frost Witch

A typical member of the group. This one is human, but you can make her an elf or
gnome by adding the proper traits. She's a Level 8 Controller with 87 HP. She
projects a **Frost Aura** (1) that makes enemies inside vulnerable 5 to cold. If
the enemy was resistant to cold, this reduces their resistance, otherwise it
increases any cold damage they suffer as normal.

The witch fights in melee with a **Frost Staff** that deals cold damage and
slides 2 squares on a hit. At range she uses a **Snow Blindness** spell that
deals cold and radiant damage. Cold resistance alone won't protect you from it!
Targets hit by the spell can't see anything further than 3 squares away (save
ends).

Once per encounter she can cast an **Icy Blast** (close blast 5) which deals
cold damage, half on a miss, and turns the affected area into a zone of
difficult terrain. This lasts a turn but can be sustained with minor actions.

### Frost Witch Harpy

Harpy members tend to be a little stronger than the others, and their cold magic
is geared towards enhancing their natural powers. They're Level 12 Controllers
with 123 HP. They add thunder resistance to the standard Frost Witch traits, and
can fly with a speed of 8 (clumsy). Their **Frost Aura** has a radius of 2. They
fight with **Frost Claws** that do cold damage, ranged **Icy Stares** that do
cold damage and slow, and a **Chilling Screech** encounter power that hits a
Close Burst 2, does cold and thunder damage, and if the target was slowed or
immobilized also inflicts ongoing 10 cold damage (save ends).

They're going to wait to use the screech once multiple players are slowed by
their stare, or by their allies' powers.

### Frozen Cauldron Guardian

These elementals are made of frozen mist, and as their name implies they hang
around the Cauldron to protect it from thieves and intruders. They're Level 15
Brutes with 179 HP. Despite its misty look. Its diffuse nature makes it hard to
hurt but that is represented by its high level and HP total - the creature is
not insubstantial.

The guardian's basic attack is called **Cold Snap**. It deals cold damage and
causes the target to fall prone. It can also expand itself temporarily for a
**Enveloping Chill** attack (recharge 4+), a Close Burst 1 that deals a bit less
cold damage and knocks prone. It also has an extra rider: targets hit by the
attack take ongoing 10 cold damage and are unable to stand up (save ends both).

Anyone fighting these things will stay prone for most of the fight, which makes
every PC's job more difficult. They pair really well with melee monsters that
can exploit combat advantage.

### Clenderi

The leader of the Frost Witches is probably one of the most powerful individuals
in the Vale. Any fight against her will likely take place near the Frozen
Cauldron, so she can expect help from a bunch of Guardians and any other
high-ranking witches the GM cares to stat up.

Clenderi is an elf, and a Level 18 Elite Controller with the Leader tag and 344
HP. She projects a **Frost Aura** that inflicts Vulnerable 5 Cold on any enemies
while they're inside. She also has the usual elven **Wild Step** that lets her
ignore difficult terrain when she shifts. She already ignores ice-based terrain
anyway due to Ice Walk, but it's also hard to restrict her movement in other
ways. She can also benefit from **Elven Accuracy** once per encounter, which
lets her reroll an attack roll that she dislikes and take the second
result. In practical terms, she can reroll an attack she missed.

Clenderi's **Frost Staff** basic attack works like that of the typical frost
witch, dealing cold damage and sliding 2 squares. Her **Icy Glare** is an
at-will ranged attack that deals cold damage and immobilizes. She can cast a
**Wind of Winter** spell (recharge 5+) that deals cold damage in a selectice
Area Burst 2 and creates a zone of icy wind that lasts for a turn. This is
difficult terrain to creatures without ice walk, and allows Clenderi's allies
who are inside to spend a move action to teleport 10 squares to a space outside
the zone.

Her ultimate technique is the **Frostfall** encounter power, a Close Blast 3
that deals cold damage and turns victims to ice! This is equivalent to being
petrified, and is a (save ends) condition. On a miss, the target takes half
damage and is restrained for a turn.

All of her spells target Fortitude, so most of the party's squishies are going
to be especially vulnerable to them.

## Final Impressions

The greatest thing about the Frost Witches are their interactions with the other
factions in the Winterbole Forest. The basic idea of an ice cult conspiring to
take over the world really comes alive when you factor in those interactions and
can see how they actually interact with the world around them.

If you need more Frost Witch stat blocks, there's one back in the [Bitterstrike][2]
entry for a Level 12 witch.


[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2022/12/01/bitterstrike.html" | relative_url }}
