---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Psurlon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-psurlon.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A psurlon, which look like a gray-skinned centipede centaur with scythe-like
    forearms and a xenomorh-style head.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

A long time ago, in a world far, far away, there was a civilization whose
mastery of psionics was so complete they decided to merge their entire
population into a single collective god-mind. They failed, and the backlash
destroyed their planet.

The survivors managed to escape to the Astral Sea, but only as disembodied
consciences. There, they came upon another world that radiated vast amounts of
psychic energy, comparable to their old home. The survivors were drawn to it
like moths to a flame, piercing the barriers that surrounded this new world and
taking over a species of worm that turned out to be particularly receptive to
their minds.

Over the following generations, these planar refugees would shape their hosts to
be more useful to their mysterious purposes, and would come to prefer their new
bodies over their old humanoid forms. And this is how the psurlons came to be,
though no one in Athas really knows the whole story.

Some psurlons reside in the Gray, amid the graves of the gods. Many others live
in Athas itself, where they often take human form to infiltrate and spy on the
city-states of the sorcerer-kings, working towards some mysterious goal of their
own. Psurlons are an old people with long memories and extremely advanced
psionic skills, so sometimes they'll be sought out by powerful psychics,
spellcasters, and historians willing to risk their lives to bargain for
knowledge.

## The Numbers

Psurlons are Medium Aberrant Magical Beasts. They have resistance to psychic
damage, a burrow speed, and Tremorsense, though the exact values on these traits
vary per stat block. Their signature ability is **Armored Mind**, a passive
trait that lets them roll saves against domination both at the start and end of
their turns, even if the condition doesn't normally end with a save.

### Psurlon Dustworm

Dustworms are specialized infiltrators, disguising themselves as humanoids to
spy on the city-states and on the comings and goings of the
sorcerer-kings. They're Level 17 Skirmishers with 164 HP. Their ground and
burrow speeds are 8, and they have 5 psychic resistance and Tremorsense 10.

The dustworm can **Change Shape** as a minor action to appear as a
humanoid. Others need to pass a DC 36 Insight check to detect the
deception. Most dustworms encountered by PCs will start out disguised, and will
do their best to maintain cover until there is no other alternative. Then, they
take their natural shapes and fight, likely attempting to escape.

In addition to Armored Mind, they also project a **Psychic Deadpool** (aura 5),
which inflicts -2 on enemy saves against ongoing psychic damage. They can attack
in melee with their **Claws**, which damage and deal ongoing 5 psychic damage
(save ends). At range, they fling **Mindknives** which deal psychic damage and
forbid the target from making opportunity attacks for a turn.

Both of these attacks can be boosted by **Psionic Augment**, which triggers
after one of them hits and lets them deal an extra 2d6 psychic damage. This
recharges when the dustworm takes psychic damage.

They can use a **Burrowing Attack** to burrow half their speed, attack someone
with a claw, and then burrow the other half of their speed. This is strangely
precise phrasing compared to the other "moving attack" skills we have seen so
far.

### Psurlon Warworm

Warworms cannot change shape, possibly because they're Huge instead of
Medium. They defend psurlon settlements and stay hidden underground near
infiltrators, waiting to burst out when things go pear-shaped. They're Level 18
Elite Brutes with 424 HP. Their ground and burrow speeds are 6, their
Tremorsense is 20, and their psychic resistance is 15.

Their **bite** deals heavy damage and inflicts ongoing 5 psychic damage (save
ends), and **Double Attack** lets them bite twice per action. Once per
encounter, they can let out a **Mind Scream** that attacks enemies in a Close
Burst 2. A hit deals heavy psychic damage and stuns for a turn. Nasty! A miss
deals half damage.

### Psurlon Mindworm

Mindworms are powerful seers, able to see many futures at once. They guide their
fellow psurlons to the ones most favorable to their secret objectives. Mindworms
are Level 19 Controllers with 181 HP. Their movement speed is 6, they have 10
Psychic resistance, and Tremorsense 10.

Their additional passive is a **Whispering Meme** aura (5) that lets the
mindworm slide enemies that start their turns within 1 square. I guess the
mysterious whispers of "this is fine" and "always has been" drive enemies to
distraction.

A mindworm will probably start the fight at range and attempt to use **Ego
Control** (recharge 5+) on a PC. This deals a sizable chunk of psychic damage
and dominates on a hit (save ends). Then they'll close in to melee range and
alternate between **Referred Pain** and their **Psychic Claws**. The first power
is a Close Burst 2 that deals psychic damage and slows for a turn; the other is
a basic attack that deals a mix of psychic and physical damage and inflicts -2
to AC for a turn.

Mindworms can also **Change Shape** and use **Psionic Augment**, both of which
work just like the dustworm's, but with higher numbers.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

There's a lot here that reminds me of mind flayers, but I think I actually like
psurlons better. With mind flayers, you know they want to eat your brain, and
most PCs will start drawing their weapons as soon as they spot one.

Psurlons have a much more mysterious goal, so they can more easily fill the
"mysterious but dangerous stranger" role instead of always being overtly
hostile. Heck, PCs might want to ally with them against a sorcerer-king.

That said, they do employ a lot of the same tactics as flayers, including
keeping large groups of dominated thralls around to help compose mixed encounter
groups.

[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
