---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Dune Reaper"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-dune-reaper.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A dune reaper. This image is mirrored from the one in the book.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.


## The Lore

Like a lot of other Athasian fauna, dune reapers are predatory
insectile/reptilian pack hunters. However, they lean a lot more towards the
"insectile" side, and their origins are clearly unnatural even to contemporary
inhabitants of Athas.

The book says they "came to existence through defiling magic", though it doesn't
specify whether they were an artificially engineered species or whether some
side effect of defiling brought them to the world. Their Aberrant origin kinda
hints at the latter.

These creatures have a complex social structure. They organize into large
familial groups known as prides, who build large hives from sand, rocks, and
organic secretions near a water source that becomes the center of their
territory. The pride then splits up into smaller packs, which roam that
territory looking for food. A pack is composed of a large female "warrior",
accompanied by smaller male "drones" and "shrieks" who are her mates. The
pride's dominant female is known as its "matron", and it's her who makes
decisions that affect the whole pack, like where to build the hive or when to
seek new territory. A matron rules the pride until her death, which is usually
in a duel with an up-and-coming warrior who challenges her for the position.

Dune reapers are a scourge on the local ecology. Their menu includes just about
everything they can reach: humanoids, animals, plants, wagons, buildings... they
even eat rocks to store in their gizzards and aid in the digestion of tougher
food. A humanoid settlement in dune reaper territory is only safe if they can
provide the creatures with an ample alternate source of food.

Dune reaper reproduction happens on an annual cycle, and they're even more
dangerous during mating season. The pride's females need to lay their eggs
inside the bodies of living creatures, you see. When the eggs hatch, the newborn
reapers eat their host, and then set upon each other. Only the strongest
hatchlings survive this process. After about two months they're already as
dangerous as a fully grown adult. At this time, they're driven from their birth
hive and must either join another pride or form a new one with other young
reapers.

## The Numbers

Dune Reapers are Aberrant Beasts with Darkvision. Their basic melee attack
always uses their **Arm Blades**, which do standard damage for their level and
might have other effects depending on the stat block.

### Dune Reaper Drone

These relatively small males are Medium and make up the dune reaper worker
caste. They build the hive and carry food back to it, but as Level 12
Skirmishers with 120 HP and Speed 8 they're certainly strong enough to take part
in the hunt as well.

Their basic **arm blade** attack also lets them shift 1 square on a hit. They
can perform a **Leaping Slash** that lets them jump 4 squares without provoking
opportunity attacks and use Arm Blade at the end of the movement. This recharges
when they're first bloodied.

If an enemy grants Combat Advantage to the drone, it can use a minor action to
**bite**, dealing light physical damage on a hit. If an enemy makes a melee
attack against the drone, it can **Leap Away**, jumping 4 squares without
drawing OAs, as an immediate reaction.

Drones want to leap into melee at the start of the fight, and seek positions
where their chosen target grants them CA. They'll leap away when attacked and
come back from an unexpected angle. When fighting drones, shoot them or surround
them. Don't let them surround you.

### Dune Reaper Shriek

That's not a role you usuall find among mundane insects. The book considers them
specialized drones that can leap not just through the air, but through time and
space. When they do this, they emit an ear-splitting scream that gives them
their name. They're Level 14 Lurkers with 106 HP and Speed 7.

Their **arm blades** are standard attacks with no riders, and are a lot more
dangerous when used in conjunction with the shriek's freaky powers. A
**Shrieking Reap** lets them make two arm blade attacks against the same
target. If one hits, it teleports the target 2 squares and inflicts 10 ongoing
damage (save ends). If both hit, the teleport distance increases to 5, and the
ongoing damage to 15. A **Shrieking Warp** removes the shriek from play until
the start of its next turn, when it appears at a spot within 10 squares of its
previous position and makes a Close Burst 2 attack that deals thunder damage and
pushes 2 squares on a hit.

Shrieking Warp is an at-will ability, but it's disabled for a turn when the
shriek takes force damage because of its **Forceful Silence** trait. Shrieking
Reap recharges whenever the creature uses Shrieking Warp. Our lurker loop here
is Shrieking Reap -> Shrieking Warp -> Repeat.

The book reminds us that forced movement is always voluntary for the attacker,
so shrieks arriving from a Warp will often choose to push all but one of the
enemies they hit with the attack, to isolate it from its allies. Clever!

### Dune Reaper Warrior

This Large female will lead a pack of drones and shrieks when hunting. She's a
Level 15 Brute with 180 HP, Speed 7, and the Leader tag.

She exudes an aura (3) of **Inciting Pheromones** that grants all dune reapers
inside a +2 bonus to Will, and makes them immune to the Dazed condition. She
also has the **Unhindered** trait we saw before, which lets her drag grabbed
characters around when she moves.

Her **arm blade** is Reach 2 and extra-strong. She can perform a **Leaping
Slash** similar to the drone's, which also inflicts 10 ongoing damage if either
attack hits.

Her triggered actions make her even more dangerous. **Snapping Mandibles**
triggers when someone hits the warrior with a melee attack. As a reaction, she
attacks their Fortitude and grabs them on a hit. Grabbed targets take 10 damage
when they fail an escape attempt. Her **Compelling Musk** (recharge 5+) is
triggered when she misses with an Arm Blade attack, and lets another dune reaper
within 3 squares make a melee basic attack as an opportunity action. I'm not
going to make a joke about that power name, it's too easy.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

Dune reaper packs number between 5 and 12 (!) individuals. Only one will be a
warrior, though you could say the PCs found more than one pack together if you
want there to be more of them.

Reapers are impossible to train, but sapient humanoids still capture them for
use as arena beasts, and hunt them as a source of leather, organic armor plates,
and blades.

These seem to me like yet another pack-based predator, the third or fourth we
saw in this reading. I do like the ominous aberrant touches in both their lore
and mechanics, though. The shriek in particular reminds me a lot of a Hound of
Tindalos.

[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
