---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Elf"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-elf.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    An Eladrin Veiled Warrior stepping out of a mirage.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

Athasian elves are tall and long-legged, and their culture is almost entirely
nomadic. Elven communities roam the deserts of Athas accompanied by swift beasts
of burden and war, but none of those are mounts. An elf will only accept being
carried by a beast if they're too sick or wounded to stand. Otherwise, they
prefer to run. And they're very good at it.

Unlike some of the other nomads we saw so far, such as brohgs, elves have
frequent interactions with Athasian settled peoples and city states. Their
overall reputation is not very good. They're known as itinerant traders who
bring a lot of cool stuff to sell in the Elven Markets many towns have, but
they're also known as swindlers, thieves, raiders, and occasionally
murderers. The cool stuff they sell you was probably stolen from someone else,
according to rumor.

This sort of reputation has a number of unplasant parallels with real-world
prejudices, so I find it off-putting that the book spends a lot of effort trying
to convince me it's true. Even the PCs have "desert raider" and "market thief"
as their new custom background options.

I'd prefer to portray elves as having a lot of solidarity for each other and not
a lot of sympathy for the outsiders who hate them so much. They drive hard
bargains at the Market and skip town en masse if it looks like someone's going
to accuse one of them of a crime. The accusation is likely to be false most of
the time, as I interpret it. Some individuals might resemble the negative
stereotype, but then again that's also true of city-dwellers, whose negative
stereotype is "servant to a slaving despot" or "slaver".

Elves who are found guilty of crimes in their own communities are cast out, and
will often end up joining groups of actual raiders and bandits.

## The Numbers

Despite their taller build elves remain Medium Fey Humanoids with a ground speed
of 7. The stat blocks here _don't_ have low-light vision, though I think that's
still a feature of PC elves. They do all have **Wild Step** and **Elven
Accuracy**, which work like their PC versions too.

The level range here is roughly comparable to that of standard elves from other
books, so you can mix-and-match a bit. All of the stat blocks here are Unaligned.

### Elf Peddler

A typical denizen of the Elven Markets. This could both represent a more or less
honest trader who knows how to defend themselves, or a cutthroat who looks for
particularly vulnerable customers to ambush after a sale. It's a Level 2
Skirmisher with the Leader tag and 34 HP.

A typical peddler's goal in a fight will be to live to fight another day, so
they always hang around places with convenient escape routes and obstacles that
might deter pursuers, such as twisty alleys or clustered stalls.

The peddler is armed with a **bone longsword**, which does standard damage for
its level. It can use the **Double Dealing** maneuver at will: this lets it make
a sword attack, shift half their speed, and then make another sword attack
against a different target if they end the shift flanking that target.

As a minor action they can also use **Peddler's Command**, which lets an ally
within 20 squares move half their speed as a free action. If that ally is
another elf, the move is instead a shift. This is useful to set up the flank for
that second Double Dealing attack.

### Elf Sniper

Another typical denizen of the markets, Snipers work security from shadowy
corners and rooftop perches. If trouble starts, they help cover their allies'
retreat with their thrown weapons.

Snipers are Level 3 Minion Lurkers armed with **Bone Daggers** and a brace of 10
**Chatkchas**, which are three-pronged sharpened boomerangs. Both of these
attacks deal a bit of extra damage if the sniper is hidden from the target when
they start the attack.

As an at-will Move action, the sniper can use **Elven Misdirection** to move 2
squares and make a free Stealth check to become hidden if they end the movement
with cover or concealment. This check has an automatic result of 25, which means
they "take 15" on the roll.

In combat, they'll try to pop out from cover, make a ranged attack, and hide
again. If someone tries to get close to them they will run. Like the peddler,
their goal in a "market fight" situation is to delay and distract pursuers
enough for their allies to flee, and then flee themselves.

### Elf Dune Strider

This nomadic warrior is used to running through the wastes. This stat block can
represent a raider, or someone who's just protecting their wandering band. It's
a Level 4 Skirmisher with 52 HP.

The Dune Strider can **Move Like the Wind**, gaining +5 to all defenses against
opportunity attacks provoked by movement. They're armed with a **Bone
Longsword** that does extra damage on a charge, and a **Obsidian Shortsword**
that's slightly better for static attacks. The **Rushing Dervish** maneuver lets
them move their Speed + 2 and make one attack with each sword against a
different target during the movement. This recharges when they're bloodied.

Striders acting as raiders will keep mobile and try to spread out their attacks
in an attempt to intimidate their targets into giving up their possessions. They
will flee if the fight turns against them. Their traits and abilities make it
easy for them to bounce around the battlefield like pinballs, making charge
attacks.

### Elf Raid Leader

The sort of veteran commander you might find leading a larger raid against a
settlement, either as revenge for mistreatment or as a plain old resource
grab. It's level 6 Artillery with the Leader tag.

The leader has a **obsidian shortsword** for emergencies, whose strikes let it
shift 1 square on a hit. It will mostly fight with its **Bone Bow**, which is
both more accurate and more damaging. It can fire **Harrying Shots** that do the
same damage as a basic ranged attack, but also make the target grant combat
advantage to adjacent allies of the leader for a turn.

Its leaderly action is a command to **Focus on the Pain** (minor action,
recharge 6+) which deals 5 damage to an ally within 20 squares and allows that
ally to immediately roll a save with a +2 bonus.

Raid leaders obviously lead from the back, providing ranged support to their
skirmisher and lurker allies. It might be good to add a brute or soldier war
beast to help protect them.


## Encounters and Final Impressions

I've already mentioned my opinion about the elven stereotypes here: I don't like
them, and would probably change them a bit were I to run a campaign in this
setting. They would be less true than depicted in the book, and depending on the
tone I was going for might or might not be less prevalent in the setting.

The stat blocks are good, and can make for an extremely mobile encounter group
when used together. As mentioned above, any brutes and soldiers who are part of
an all-elven group will likely be trained war beasts instead of more elves.
