---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Halfling"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-halfling.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A gith warrior with a spear.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

Athasian halflings are physically identical to their standard 4e counterparts,
but their culture is very different. If you have ever heard of Dark Sun in any
detail, you'll likely also have heard that it has cannibal halflings.

This is true, but I feel it's lost a bit of its impact here, halfway down the
critter list for the book. Halflings are the fourth cannibal humanoids we met so
far, after belgois, braxats, and gith. I'm not even counting all the magical
beasts that eat sapients, or we'd be here all day reciting names.

They still have the disctinction of being our first _playable_ cannibals. Most
Dark Sun halflings belong to the tribal cultures that inhabit the Forest Ridge,
one of the last remaining green regions of Athas. They're very territorial and
distrustful of other species, violently defending their homes from any
invasion. Their cannibalism is mostly ritualistic, though the book also says
they eat captured intruders.

Individuals or small groups often leave the Forest Ridge to explore the Seven
Cities and the deserts between them. Some stick around and find employment as
guides, scouts and trackers. The worst among them might become slavers or
raiders.

Halfling tribes will deal honorably with those that are honorable to them in
turn, but anyone who breaks an oath to a halfling tribe will be declared their
eternal enemy.

The other distinction halflings have is that they're some of the oldest sapient
peoples of Athas.

## The Numbers

Athasian halflings have the exact same stats as standard ones. They're Small
Natural Humanoids with a ground speed of 6 and the **Nimble Reaction** trait
that gives them +2 to AC against opportunity attacks.

All of the stat blocks here are enthusiastic users of poison, which is a good
survival strategy in a world where everyone is larger than you.

### Halfling Forest Runner

Your typical sneaky halfling scout-type, this is a Level 2 Skirmisher with 37
HP. They fight with a **poisoned spear** that does a mix of physical and poison
damage, and have a special technique named **Strike and Slip Away** (recharge
4+) that lets them make a stronger spear attack that deals ongoing poison damage
(save ends). As an effect they can then shift 5 squares and make a Stealth test
to hide if they have any cover or concealment at the end of this shift.

### Halfling Wilder

A halfling psion trained in their ancient traditions. This one is Level 3
Artillery with 38 HP. Their main ranged attack is a **Mind Thrust** (ranged 10)
that deals psychic damage and makes the target grant combat advantage for a
turn. They have a simple **club** for melee emergencies. All of their attacks
dels extra damage when the target grants combat advantage, making them good at
focused fire tactics.

### Halfling Forest Keeper

This is a pretty traditional druid of the sort that loves summoning and
controlling vines and plants... which makes it a very exotic and mysterious
spellcaster by Athasian standards, where everyone else has sand and sun
powers. Forest Keepers are respected leaders of their people, responsible for
preserving their oral traditions and lore.

Our stat block here is for a Level 6 Controller with the Leader tag and 72
HP. Its melee basic attack is a **Distracting Staff** that does standard damage
on a hit and lets an ally of the keeper within 5 squares shift 1 square. At
range if fires **Thorn Darts** that deal poison damage and make the target
vulnerable 5 to poison for a turn.

**Spirit Creepers** (recharge 5+) is our "vines" spell, an Area Burst 2 within
10 that affects only enemies, targets Reflex, deals physical damage, and
restrains on a hit (save ends). Allies caught in the burst recover 5 HP instead.

**Constricting Creepers** (encounter) is a stronger version that deals physical
damage in a Close Burst 3 around the keeper, and knocks prone on a hit.

### Halfling Headhunter

An elite champion whose mission is to stalk and eliminate the tribe's worst
enemies... and to bring their heads as proof. It's a Level 11 Skirmisher with
114 HP.

The headhunter's attacks all do extra damage when it has **combat
advantage**. Its main weapon is a **kukri** that does a blend of physical and
poison damage, and it can also throw equally poisoned **Javelins** that also
slow on a hit. **Harrying Attack** (recharge 5+) lets the headhunter make a
dagger attack, shift 3 squares, and then make another dagger attack all as part
of the same action.

They use these tools to stay at the edges of a fight and harry the
squishies. Add some leveled-up wilders to make them even stronger by making the
PCs vulnerable to poison.


## Encounters and Final Impressions

In their Forest Ridge homes, halflings are very unlikely to be accompanied by
humanoids of other species, but they do domesticate a lot of the local wildlife
for use in battle. In another twist that seems extremely exotic to Athasians and
very familiar to us, most of this wildlife consists of mammals and birds,
instead of reptiles and insects. Panthers, kirres (which we'll see soon),
griffons, and so on.

When met in the general Seven Cities area, they join the pool of species you can
draw from to assemble Mixed Parties of People.

Halflings are very skirmisher-y here, and it looks like all stat blocks are
simple enough that you can adjust their level directly without having to make
big changes to their abilities. Monster Manual halfling stats work well in
conjunction with these, though I'd replace any slings with poison darts or the
equivalent to keep the flavor.
