---
layout: post
title: "Quar and Their Guns in GURPS"
tags:
    - gurps
    - quar
---

Recently, I became aware of the Quar. Aren't they neat?

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/quar-unit.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
  A squad of Quar soldiers, with officers, standard-bearer, and messenger
  squirrel handler. Source: <a href="https://rhyfler.com">https://rhyfler.com</a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These funny anteater people are the stars of a couple of miniature wargames, the
28mm-scale **Clash of Rhyfles** and the 15mm-scale **This Quar's War**. Both of
these have their rulebooks freely available [here][1], which is also where the
image above comes from.

An individual Quar is a funny little person who just wants to chill with a hot
cup of tea and a plate of moth cakes. Quar _societies_ however are very, er,
quarrelsome, so most of their history is an endless procession of wars.

I was motivated to write this article both because I think the setting is neat,
and because the technical information about Quar weapons in the Clash of Rhyfles
game made me think I can stat them up in GURPS.

## Very Short Setting Summary

The wargames cover a particularly turbulent period in the history of Aldwyn, the
Quar home world. It's marked by at least twenty years of worldwide trench
warfare between two large multinational coalitions. The tech level is somewhere
between WW1 and WW2, and this is pretty much the war that introduced industrial
warfare to their world.

If the idea of these adorable creatures being fed into one of the worst
meat-grinders imaginable is horrifying to you, then you get the setting's main
idea. I've heard it described as "grimsical". It replaces the "dark" vibe from
"grimdark" with "whimsical", but it's still grim. The cuter the miniatures for
their soldiers and tanks get, the stronger the dissonance becomes.

The Clash or Rhyfles quickstart book centers on the two main factions of the
war. The Crusade is a coalition of former monarchies who successfully toppled
their old regimes and became republics. They're led by the Republic of Tok, and
made up of many smaller nations that follow the same standards for equipment and
tactics. The rules here could be used for quar from any of those places.

On the other side, the Kingdom of Coftyr leads an alliance of the world's
remaining monarchies to stamp out this revolution. Each kingdom here tends to be
visually distinct, as their whole thing is adherence to ancient traditions and
heraldry. Therefore, the book only covers Coftyr itself.

Free add-ons provide details for "sub-factions" allied to either side. These are
Crusader or monarchist nations who do their own thing on the battlefield.

As usual for wargames, both sides are morally ambiguous. Opposing monarchy is a
good thing in my book, but the Crusade is also the side that introduced
industrial warfare to the world. Coftyr flavor text is all about honor and
chivalry and heroism, but they adopted industrial warfare just as readily and at
the end of the day are still defenders of absolute monarchy.

I get the impression that the world of Alwyn could settle into a more or less
stable configuration if everyone just stopped and signed a status quo peace
treaty, but they've all been fighting for 20 years by now and none of their
leaders show any sign of wanting to stop.

As usual for wargames, you pick the side you think looks neater, paint them up,
and pit them against other factions in battles that would fit somewhere in those
decades of war. Most of these battles focus on infantry with the occasional
tanks thrown in. There seem to be airships, but I don't know if they have
airplanes yet.

## Quar in GURPS

The typical Quar is about 1.5 meters tall and weights around 60kg. They follow a
largely humanoid body plan. Their skins can take on any of a large number of
hues, from yellows and greens to blues and purples and oranges. Often, they're a
little mottled. Their diet tends to include lots of bugs, though those are often
prepared as ingredients in dishes that we would otherwise recognize.

Stat-wise, I'd say they are absolutely identical to humans. If you insist on
being strict, make them about a foot shorter than their ST would indicate, but
do not adjust their stats in any other way. Being a Quar costs 0 points.

Because that's the thing, you see? Quar are just people. The horrors inflicted
on them are horrible because _war_ is horrible, not because Quar are adorable.

## Quar Guns in GURPS

Guns in Clash or Rhyfles don't actually have damage ratings, just range and
optional traits. The results of a ranged attack roll depend entirely on the
degree of success for your skill roll. They might leave a target unaffected,
Gobsmacked (stunned) or Taken Out, which is different from "dead": they might
still be rescued during or after the battle.

However, the skirmish game rules include enough fluff about the infantry weapons
of the Crusade that I kinda want to try statting them up in GURPS. If I ever get
the same information for the Coftyri ones, I'll stat them up too.

The book mentiones the muzzle velocity and caliber of a couple of the weapons,
and if I make a guess about the weight of the bullet I can plug those three
things in the simplest possible version of the [unofficial official GURPS
ballistics equation][2] to get a damage figure.

That link also contains a complete spreadsheet that demands things like chamber
pressure, which I have no chance of figuring out. So stuff like Accuracy and
range will be derived by the older method of eyeballing existing guns, as will
bullet weight.

The numbers in the original material are just there for color, of course. None
of them affect the rules of the miniature wargame itself. But if we take them as
true, we see that Quar are very fond guns with big bullets and powerful
propellant charges, fired out of guns with short barrels and very light
construction. The recoil on those is gonna be ridiculous.

### The Bogen Rifle

The signature weapon of the Crusade rhyfler, the Bogen semi-automatic rifle is
said to fire a 12mm bullet at 580m/s. It uses a 5 or 10 round magazine and
weights 2.4kg "fully loaded". Its effective range is 150-250 meters.

The closest real-world bullet to this one in GURPS High-Tech is the
.45-something family of rifle rounds, which are 11.43mm in diameter and weight
31 grams. After some fiddling, I decide to go with a slightly lower 27 grams for
the Quar bullet, which gives us exactly 7d damage. This is pi+ because of the
caliber. Picture them as being broader, shorter and rounder than Earth rifle
cartridges, which is in theme for all things Quar.

This gives us a gun that packs about the same punch as a real-world M1 Garand
rifle while having almost exactly half its weight and about the length of an M16
assault rifle. That's going to have a significant kick, to say the least.

| TL | Weapon | Damage | Acc | Range    | Weight       | RoF | Shots | ST  | Bulk | Rcl |
|:--:|:------:|:------:|:---:|:--------:|:------------:|:---:|:-----:|:---:|:----:|:----|
| 7  | Bogen  | 7d pi+ | 3   | 900/3500 | 2.4kg/0.36kg | 3   | 5(3)  | 11† | -5   | 4   |


### The Rhyshi (R4) Heavy Rifle

Only slightly longer than the Bogen, the Rhyshi fires a huge 20mm round with a
720m/s muzzle velocity. Its magazine carries seven of those, and it's said to
require a solid stance and firm support to shoot with any kind of accuracy. A
squad mate's shoulder will do for support, according to the book, but I'm going
to give this rifle an integral folding bipod because I'm not a monster. A
properly braced R4 has greater range than the Bogen, and can penetrate up to
"medium" vehicular armor.

The closest thing to this I can find on High-Tech is the Mauser Tank-Gewehr 18,
the WW1 German anti-tank rifle. Its caliber is "only" 13mm, but it's the largest
anti-tank rifle in that table that is even removely Quar-portable. Plugging its
bullet mass, caliber and printed velocity in our magic spreadsheet, we get 10d+3
damage, which following High-Tech convention can be rounded and written as
5dx2. Let's also give it an armor-piercing round, because I see the WW1 tank
examples in the book have DR 45.

5dx2 is the same damage as the T-Gew18, but the Rhyshi again weights less than
half of what the real gun does. It's not that much longer than the Bogen either,
so it's gonna be a beast to handle unless it's properly braced. As the book
says, Quar Crusaders frequently attach a bayonet to the Rhyshi because there's
no way it can be fired in close quarters.

| TL | Weapon | Damage      | Acc | Range     | Weight    | RoF | Shots | ST   | Bulk | Rcl |
|:--:|:------:|:-----------:|:---:|:---------:|:---------:|:---:|:-----:|:----:|:----:|:----|
| 7  | Rhyshi | 5dx2(2) pi+ | 4   | 1100/4400 | 7.5kg/1kg | 3   | 7(3)  | 18B† | -6   | 7   |

### Grifkis Shotgun

This is a 10-gauge, six-kilo trench gun firing buckshot ammo. The only Crusade
gun to still be largely hand-made, it's carried by officers as a badge of honor
and a symbol of courage. The illustration shows its barrel is fairly short, but
it still has a shoulder stock.

No need to fiddle with spreadsheets this time, we have a 10G double-barrel
shotgun in High Tech. Let's borrow its stats and adjust for the shortened
"whippet" barrels:

| TL | Weapon  | Damage  | Acc | Range  | Weight     | RoF  | Shots | ST  | Bulk | Rcl |
|:--:|:-------:|:-------:|:---:|:------:|:----------:|:----:|:-----:|:---:|:----:|:----|
| 6  | Grifkis | 2d-1 pi | 3   | 40/800 | 6kg/0.15kg | 2x13 | 2(3i) | 12† | -4   | 1/7 |

The short barrels give this gun a more pronounced muzzle blast (+1 to Hearing
and Vision to locate when fired in the dark). I'm using the listed weight for it
here, which makes it about 50% heavier than the real world example from
High-Tech. Big caliber, two barrels, extra chonky? This is basically the Doom
Super Shotgun.

### H-11a Light Machine Gun

According to the book, this LMG fires the same round as the Bogen rifle, and the
Crusade likes to use it as an offensive squad support weapon. It appears longer
than the rifle, and can also be used in vehicular mounts when the force can't
find heavier MGs to put in there.

I think I'm just going to crib from High-Tech again, and blend some of the
Bogen's stats with those of the MG34.

| TL | Weapon | Damage | Acc | Range    | Weight     | RoF | Shots | ST   | Bulk | Rcl |
|:--:|:------:|:------:|:---:|:--------:|:----------:|:---:|:-----:|:----:|:----:|:----|
| 7  | H-11a  | 7d pi+ | 5   | 900/3500 | 15kg/2.5kg | 15  | 50(5) | 12B† | -7   | 2   |

This gives us a gun that's actually heavier than the Rhyshi rifle, and whose
recoil is manageable enough that it's worth firing more than one bullet per
turn. It fires rounds from a non-disintegrating cloth belt.

## Final Impressions

Look at those things. Just look at them. Their damage values combined with the
light weight and short barrel means they have _powerful_ powder charges. Quar
like big booms and they cannot lie.

The recoil on these things means the act of firing them is somewhere between
"comical" and "painful for the shooter". I'm guessing that a Taken Out result in
the wargame very often means the target got spooked and decided to play dead,
instead of actually being hit. This also explains why a quar can take
_themselves_ out on a bad skill roll.


[1]: https://rhyfler.com
[2]: https://gamingballistic.com/2022/04/11/old-ballistics-spreadsheet-a-repost/
