---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Drake"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
    - lets-read
---

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

Athas only has one dragon: The Dragon of Tyr. He's the setting's main bad guy,
over and above the Sorcerer-Kings. As such, he's immensely powerful,
intelligent, and evil. Prime Final Boss material!

However, you might not want to wait until your PCs are level 30 demigods before
they can fight a nasty giant lizard with elemental powers. That's where Drakes
come in.

Athas has a lot of things that would be called drakes in standard 4e, but here
the name refers to something else entirely. The things Athasians call "Drakes"
are, essentially, nonsapient dragons. They fulfill many of a dragon's narrative
functions. They're big and tough enemies that make splendid boss fights for
high-Paragon or low-Epic parties. There are several types associated with
different elements. They lair in areas dominated by their associated element and
possess psychic powers that let them summon and control orbs of that element
from the Elemental Chaos. They even have a hoarding instinct!

The roles they _don't_ fulfill are those of being a Machiavellian plotter or a
big player in regional politics, which are things you'd expect a powerful enough
dragon to be. They're animals, not people. A text box informs us drakes were
written this way because the Dark Sun setting is very geographically limited,
and has a relatively small number of movers-and-shakers who are all accounted
for. Adding an arbitrary number of traditional sapient epic dragons to this mix
would wreck the setting's delicate equilibrium, and that's a job for the PCs.

Another consequence of drakes not being sapient is that there's no guarantee
their hoards will be _valuable_. There might be some good loot there, but it's
going to be mixed with a mountain of trinkets and souvenirs that are merely
shiny or pretty.

## The Numbers

All drakes presented here are Huge Elemental Beasts with the Reptile tag, and a
tag corresponding to their associated element. They all have a **Bite** and a
**Claw** that act as basic attacks, and the signature **Drake's Fury** power
that lets them spend a single action to use two Claws against one target and a
Bite against a different target.

Their elemental orb powers are area attacks that create a hazardous zone in the
affected area, but their exact powers vary with each stat block. They always
have a **Bloodied Response** reaction that lets them immediately rechage and use
an elemental power when first bloodied.

The same text box that discusses why drakes are nonsapient tells us we can take
any dragon from other books and add them as drakes in Athas by declaring them
nonsapient. Good candidates include brown, gray and red dragons from the
chromatics; adamantine, iron, and orium dragons from the metallics; and any of
the catastrophic dragons. You might want to change the appearance of the
metallics too, since their default coloration stands out too much.

### Water Drake

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-drake-water.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A water drake ready to ambush you from its oasis hideout.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Water drakes like to lair in oases. A possible sign of their presence is the
total _absence_ of the small animals that usually live in such an
environment. If you find such a place, you should either keep moving or be very,
very sneaky when filling your waterskin.

This crocodile-looking beast is a Level 18 Solo Controller with 680 HP. It has
Resist 10 Cold, a ground speed of 8, and a swim speed of 12. It's **Aquatic**,
meaning it can breathe underwater and gets +2 to attacks against non-aquatic
creatures in underwater combat.

The drake's elemental attack is an **Orb of Elemental Water**,
which is a fireball-sized area attack (area 2 within 10, recharge 5+). It comes
in two versions:

- The **boiling** orb deals fire damage despite being made of water, and creates
  a damaging zone that lasts for the rest of the encounter or until the drake
  uses another boiling orb.

- The **ice** orb deals no immediate damage, but inflicts ongoing 20 cold damage
  and restrains (save ends both). It creates a zone that repeats the orb's
  attack against any creatures start their turn in the zone and are not
  restrained. Again, this lasts until the end of the encounter or until the
  drake uses another ice orb.

Yes, this means the drake can have both a boiling and a frozen zone in place
simultaneously, though I'd rule they can't overlap.

The drake's other power is **Psionic Clone** (minor action, recharge 4+), which
lets it create a duplicate of itself on a solid or liquid adjacent space in the
map. The copy can acts independently and can take a full turn on an initiative
count 10 lower than the original's. It has all the original's stats and powers
with the following exceptions: it only has 1 HP; and it shares the original's
recharge roll for its powers instead of having its own. If the original has any
spent powers when it uses this power, the copy's powers will also start out
spent.

The water drake's **Bloodied Response** recharges _both_ the Orb and Psionic
Clone, letting the drake use both as a free action right then and
there. Double the orbs, double the fun.

### Fire Drake

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-drake-fire.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A fire drake roaring atop a patch of flaming ground.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The flavor text here has a fire drake living inside an active volcano and
worshipped as a god by a halfling tribe, who try to sacrifice a human to it only
to be eaten along with the intended victim. Cliches aside, this shows us you can
find fire drakes in volcanos and other such places.

Fire drakes are Level 20 Elite Lurkers with 298 HP, a Speed of 9, and Resist 15
Fire.

The drake's **bite** does standard damage for its level. The **claw** is a
little weaker but grabs on a hit. **Drake's Fury** works as normal.

The creature's **Orb of Elemental Fire** (recharge 5+) is an Area Burst 1 within
10 that deals fire damage and creates a damaging fire zone that lasts until the
end of the encounter or until the drake casts another orb. While it waits for
the power to recharge, it can use minor actions to move the existing magma zone
4 squares. The drake's **Bloodied Response** recharges this orb and lets the
beast use it immediately.

The fire drake's last power is not elemental: it's **Living Shield**, an
opportunity action that lets the beast use a grabbed victim as a shield if
anyone other than that victim damages it. This makes the victim take half of the
attack's damage, with the other half still affecting the drake.

There's nothing terribly lurkery about the fire drake. With that grab and the
mobile zone, you could have made it a controller instead.

### Air Drake

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-drake-air.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    An air drake in a menacing stance.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Air drakes live in tall mountains and canyons. They love to hunt animals and
people who try to walk the precarious passes of these places, knocking them down
with their wind powers and devouring the tenderized remains. They're Level 22
Elite Skirmishers with 404 HP, a ground speed of 8, and a flight speed of 10.

These creatures deal extra damage when they have CA on an enemy, and this bonus
increases when they're bloodied. Their physical attacks are otherwise pretty
standard for a drake.

Their **Orb of Elemental Air** has a wider radius than usual (area burst 3
within 10), and deals untyped damage on a hit. On a hit it also slides the
targets 5 squares, and creates the usual damaging zone. The zone cannot be
moved, but slides targets 3 squares when it damages them. This recharges when
the drake is first bloodied, but it has to be used during the drake's actions
after this.

When pressured, the drake can use **Wind Veil** as a minor action (recharge
4+). This lets it shift its speed and gain concealment against non-adjacent
enemies until the end of its next turn. **Bloodied Response** recharges this,
and lets the creature use it immediately.

It felt odd for Bloodied Response to be such a defensive power here... but then
I saw that it's because the drake can use **Control the Wind** as a reaction
when damaged. This is a Close Burst 5 vs. AC that deals the same damage as the
bite to the triggering enemy, and lets the monster slide the target 3
squares. Exceptionally, this slide can be _vertical_, which means the target
will take a bit of fall damage when it falls back to the ground... or a lot of
fall damage if tossed diagonally into a chasm. A merciful GM could probably
still allow the usual save vs. hazardous terrain to let the victim cling to an
edge before being tossed.

### Earth Drake


{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-drake-earth.jpeg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    An earth drake.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

A spicy bullette with earth control powers. Earth Drakes are Level 24 Elite
Controllers with 456 HP, a ground speed of 8, and a burrow speed of 6.

Their physical attaks work as usual. Their **Orb of Elemental Earth** is an Area
1 within 10 attack vs. Fortitude. It damages and restrains (save ends) on a hit,
deals half damage on a miss.

The resulting zone is difficult terrain, and the drake can use minor actions to
make secondary attacks against anyone inside. This deals a tiny bit of physical
damage and knocks the target prone. This is what **Bloodied Response**
recharges, but it's not the only thing that happens when the earth drake is
bloodied.

You see, when that happens the drake **Expands**. It goes from Huge to
Gargantuan, pushing any targets that were adjacent to it out of its new occupied
space. While this lasts (until the end of the drake's next turn), the drake's
melee reach improves from 3 to 4, it gains +2 to AC, and anyone hit by its
attacks is immobilized.

When someone damages the drake it can use **Immovable Stone** as a reaction,
ignoring up to 4 squares of forced movement and using its bite against the
attacker.

## Encounter and Final Impressions

Since Athasian Drakes lack sapience, it's harder to justify them being
accompanied by minions. However, all but the Water Drake are elites, which means
it's very easy to set up an encounter against a mated pair of them. It might
also be possible to add elementals of an appropriate level to any drake
encounter as extra minions or regulars. The beasts wouldn't be interested in
eating them.

Overall I like their mechanics. Taking one of these drakes and turning them into
a sapient dragon for outside of Dark Sun is as easy as taking a foreign dragon
and turning it into an Athasian Drake.

[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
