---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Human"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

## The Lore

Remember how I keep mentioning Mixed Groups of People as possible encounter
groups? How they can be anything, allied or hostile, made up of free or enslaved
individuals, working for any one of the setting's factions or none at all?

That's exactly the kind of description you get for humans in this entry. They
are the most numerous humanoid species on Athas, they are infinitely varied and
adaptable, and all the other stuff you have read about them a thousand times in
other places. What this tells me is that those Mixed Groups of People will be
mostly made up of humans.

## The Numbers

Humans in Athas are mechanically identical to humans elsewhere. Medium Natural
Humanoids with Speed 6, and with absolutely everything else determined by
training in each specific stat block.

Any of these stat blocks can easily be adjusted to represent a member of another
species by adding that species' signature traits o it.


### Human Slave

If humans make up the bulk of those Mixed Groups of People, then it's logical to
assume they also make up the bulk of Athas' enslaved population. You'll see them
in large numbers while walking down the street of any of the sorcerer-kings'
city states.

The Human Slave is a Level 1 Minion Brute, armed with a **club** that's likely
improvised. They gain +1 bonus damage for each ally adjacent to their target,
and **Laborer's Resilience** make them stay up for an additional turn after
being reduced to 0 HP.

As you can see, they're quite bad at fighting, and will likely only do so if
they have no other choice. Only their large numbers make them a threat to
PCs.

### Human Wasteland Raider

This is a typical member of those hostile Mixed Groups of People who attack you
while you're traveling the wastes, intent on either killing you, taking your
stuff, or both. They're Level 2 Soldiers with 40 HP.

The most striking thing about this stat block is the big editing error right in
the middle, a **barbed spear** attack that has no listed damage and should be
ignored. The raider's actual weapon is a **Dagger** that does standard physical
damage and can be used in a stronger **Gutting Dagger** attack against someone
grabbed by the raider.

Maybe the spear was supposed to be the attack that grabbed the target? As it is,
the raider has to use the default rules and perform a Grab action to do
it. My suggestion here would be to replace the **dagger** basic attack with a
**Barbed Spear** that does the same damage, grabs on a hit, and cannot be used
against other targets while the raider has a target grabbed. Gutting Dagger
would then turn into Gutting Spear, with the same effects.

### Human Dune Trader

I remember disliking the emphasis the book put on elven traders being unreliable
and dishonest, but it looks like it doesn't have much better to say about the
human ones. This one is described as being flanked by burly bodyguards as he
cheerfully lies about the price and quality of his goods.

Dune Traders are Level 4 Controllers with the Leader tag and 55 HP. They're
armed with **hatchets** that do physical damage and cause the target to grant
Combat Advantage for a turn.

While unbloodied, they can spend minor actions on **Goading Commands** that let
one ally within 6 squares move their speed as a free action. While bloodied,
this changes to a **Furious Glare**, a standard action that attacks the Will of
enemies in a Close Blast 3. It does no damage, but immobilizes and makes the
targets grant combat advantage on a hit (save ends both).

### Human Gladiator Novice

Those gladiators who managed to survive their first few fights can go on to
achieve fame and greatness... but this one is still figuring out the surviving
part. There are many like him on every arena. He's a level 4 Soldier with 55 HP.

The gladiator novice fights with a **short sword** that damages and marks on a
hit, and can perform a **hamstring cut** that does the same damage, knocks
prone, and slows (save ends). If an adjacent enemy stands up, the novice can
use **Stay Down!** as a reaction to attack their Reflex and knock them back down
on a hit.

The book remarks that gladiators are one of the opponent types that have
in-character reasons for picking less than optimal combat options during a
fight, as long as they make for a better show.

### Human Overseer

Our first explicitly Evil stat block in this entry. The things they oversee are
the sale, transport, and daily (mis)treatment of slaves. Whether they display
malicious glee or banal apathy towards the cruelty that surrounds them, it
remains true that their job is to perpetuate it. They're Level 9 Controllers
with the Leader tag and 96 HP.

Overseers are armed with **Obsidian Swords**, and they have extensive training
in psychic powers that assault and dominate the mind because of course they
do. They project a **Mental Mire** around themselves (aura 2) that slows enemies
who starts their turns inside. **Not So Fast!** is a ranged attack that deals
psychic damage and pulls 3 squares. And **Do My Bidding** targets one slowed
creature within 2 squares and dominates it for a turn on a hit. This one is
thankfully not at-will - it recharges when the overseer is bloodied.

### Human Slavehunter

Another Evil entry. Slavehunters do what it says on the tin, roaming both the
wilds and the streets looking for new people to enslave. Anyone who looks like
they'd fetch a good price and won't put up much of a fight is fair game. They're
Level 10 Skirmishers with 103 HP.

This villain is armed with a **Mace** and a **Obsidian-toothed Whip**. A hit
with the mace lets them shift 1 square. A hit with the whip pulls the target 1
square and knocks it prone. As minor actions, they can use **Swift Pursuit** to
shift 3 squares (recharges when bloodied) or **Cutting Lash** to inflict ongoing
10 damage (save ends) on a prone creature as an encounter power.

The book mentions a power named "Face Smash", but this isn't present on the stat
block. I guess there were some editing hiccups, and it was replaced by Cutting
Lash without any changes to the surrounding text.

### Human Templar of Tyr

Fourth Edition Dark Sun is set right after the sorcerer-king of Tyr was deposed
and killed in a violent revolution, and this book describes the city's templars
as being "cast adrift" and only relying on "themselves and each other" to impose
their will.

This seems to me like a fancy way to say they immediately pivoted to being a
crime syndicate after losing their official authority, though I remember
something in the older 2e books about Tyr still having some templars in its
government. This stat block is Evil, so I'm guessing it represents a "loyalist"
templar who is now a mobster.

This templar is a Level 10 Controller with 106 HP. It fights exclusively with
Force magic. Its basic melee attack is an **Eldritch Spear** that does force
damage and slides targets 1 square on a hit. The basic ranged attack is an
**Eldritch Bolt** that does the same amount of force damage and pushes 2
squares. **Eldritch Cage** (recharge 5+) is an Area Burst 2 spell that attacks
all creatures in the area. On a hit it restrains and deals 10 ongoing force
damage (save ends). The book says the templar is not shy about including some of
its own allies in the area if it will help them get more PCs.

None of the templar's powers explicitly mention defiling, but you could give
them a version of the next stat block's passive trait if you wish.

### Human Defiler

In Athas, despoiling an already ravaged ecosystem is a big taboo that's sure to
draw the ire of those who see you do it... unless you're a sorcerer-king or a
templar, I guess. The defilers represented by this stat block are neither, but
they really want to be and think the scorn of the ignorant masses is a light
price to pay for Ultimate Cosmic Power. You could also uses these stats for a
higher-ranking templar.

The Human Defiler is Level 14 Artillery with 108 HP (and also Evil). It has the
**Defiling** passive trait, which deals 5 necrotic damage to all enemies within
3 squares whenever the defiler uses an implement power.

Its only non-implement power is a **staff** bonk that causes a mix of physical
and necrotic damage. The templar prefers to fight from a distance with lightning
spells. **Lightning Lance** is a basic ranged attack that does lightning damage,
and **Lightning Serpent**, an encounter power that does a bit less lightning
damage but also inflicts ongoing 10 poison damage (save ends). Once per
encounter, the Defiler can use **Dimension Door** to teleport 10 squares,
something it will probably use as an emergency escape measure.

When an enemy within 10 squares of the defiler spends a healing surge, it can
use **Defiling Serpent** as a free action to regain HP equal to half the value
of the triggering surge and recharge Lightning Serpent.

### Human Mind Adept

We're out of the Evil Zone again. This is a powerful human telepath that can be
cast in any role, friendly or not: a Level 15 Controller with 145 HP.

Mind adepts rely solely on their powers (and on their teammates, of course) for
defense. We start with an aura (2) of **Overwhelming Thoughts** that makes it so
any enemy that ends their turn inside cannot target the adept with an attack
until the end of their next turn. This means melee-based PCs will only be
attacking them every other turn.

Pretty much all of the adept's attacks are psychic powers that target Will. For
melee, we have the **Mind-Wracking Touch** dealing psychic damage and making the
target grant combat advantage for a turn. For greater ranges we have the at-will
**Paralyzing Blast** (close blast 5) which targets enemies, deals light psychic
damage, and immobilizes for a turn on a hit.

The adept's ultimate technique is **Will of the Master**, a ranged attack that
deals no damage and dominates (save ends). While the target is dominated, it
emits harmful psychic waves: any enemy that starts their turn within 2 squares
of the target takes 5 psychic damage and is immobilized for a turn. This is an
encounter power that recharges whenever it misses.

When the adept is reduced to 0 HP, it causes **Mental Overload** in a Close
Burst 1. This targets enemies and on a hit deals psychic damage and stuns for a
turn.

### Human Blade Noble

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-human-blade-noble.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A red-haired woman human wearing leather armor and holding a sheathed sword.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The most powerful human in this entry is not a wizard or a psychic, but someone
who is Just That Good with a sword. Or in other words: Hello, Ms. Malenia! Fancy
meeting you here. This is a Level 17 Controller with 163 HP.

The blade noble has a trait named **Unpredictable Flank** that gives them combat
advantage against any enemy adjacent to one of their allies. No need to setup a
by-the-book flanking position.

They fight with a **Duelist's Blade**, which given the context is probably one
of the few magical steel swords that still survive in Athas. Its basic attacks
do physical damage and slide the target 1 square.

**Dance of Blades** (recharge 6+) is the [technique][2] that reminded me of
Malenia: it attacks enemies in a Close Burst 2, deals the same damage as a basic
attack, immobilizes, and inflicts ongoing 5 damage (save ends). On a miss it
still does half damage, which is a rarity on a rechargeable attack. The noble
can shift 2 squares as an effect as well.

For triggered actions we have **Whirling Parry**, an encounter power that
triggers when an ally of the noble's within 2 squares is hit by a melee or
ranged attack. As an interrupt, the noble shifts 2 squares to be adjacent to the
ally and rolls an attack using its standard bonus vs. AC. If that's higher than
the triggering attack roll, the triggering attack misses.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

The individual stat blocks are pretty cool, but the lore is your standard Humans
Are The Most Generic thing. In the end this ends up being a very ecletic set of
People that you can reskin as any species and any narrative role that best fits
your specific campaign.

I know some more recent games have explicitly gone this route for pretty much
every humanoid NPC, giving us stat blocks based on narrative or mechanical role
("Bandit", "Guard", "Brute", "Wizard") and then letting us assign any species as
necessary. D&D 4e wasn't quite there yet, but ended up doing it by accident on
this entry.

[2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rlnv_DCBEa8
