---
layout: post
title: 'Dungeon Fantasy "Monster": Recap'
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

I'm going to write this in the same format I use for my Monster Manual Let's
Reads, even though it's not really a "monster".

## The Lore

These plump mushrooms are a about a foot tall when fully grown, and have purple
caps. They're very distantly related to shriekers, but their abilities are much
more specialized.

When someone disturbs a recap, the mushroom scans the person's memories and
loudly summarizes the most important events of the last week or so of their
lives.

"Most important" here is defined by what's foremost in the target's minds. Yes,
they do have a tendency to spill closely held secrets that are big sources of
anxiety or regret for the victim. Some believe recaps they were originally
developed by an underground civilization with a strong tradition in psionics to
acts as interrogation tools. Nowadays you can find them in the wild inside caves
and other damp and dark places, like many dungeons.

At least one investigator on the surface is known to carry a potted recap around
in a specially built cage, using it for its original purpose when questioning
suspects.

## The Numbers

Recaps aren't "monsters" in a literal sense. Despite their radio-announcer
voices, they're nonsapient and immobile. A good whack with any weapon will
destroy your typical recap. In GURPS, it has SM -5, DR 0, and 1 HP.

### Wild Recap Cluster

In the wild, recaps grow in clusters and work like traps. Clusters are usually
on the ground, but might also grow on walls or ceilings. If one mushroom in the
cluster is disturbed by a touch at least strong enough to jostle it, the whole
cluster "activates" and performs its narration as one big speaker. Actual damage
also counts, of course - if a damaging attack leaves at least one recap
standing, it will activate on the next turn.

A recap cluster takes up 1 hex and has the following stats.

_Detect_: Clusters are usually big enough to be plainly visible. Roll
**Naturalist** at -2 to identify the mushrooms as recaps.

_Disarm_: No. Attacks that deal at least 6 damage to the whole hex at once will
completely destroy all the recaps before they can activate. Anything less will
trigger them.

_Avoid_: **DX** at -5 or **Light Walk**. The **Silence** spell will render the
cluster harmless for as long as it lasts.

_Save_: Quick Contest of **Will** against skill 16 to avoid having your mind
read. **Magic Resistance** helps.

_Effect_: If the target won the contest of Will, this will be a string of
nonsense words. If they lost, the recap will summarize the previous week of
their lives as if it was the last episode of a radio serial, potentially airing
some dirty laundry.

_Shots_: Constant.

_Rearm_: No.

_Steal_: Roll against **Naturalist** to harvest one large, healthy recap
specimen per hex. This is worth $1000 if delivered intact to the right people
back in town.

### Recap Inquisitor

This consists of a large, healthy recap specimen planted on good soil in a clay
pot, surrounded by small but sturdy iron cage with large gaps between the
bars. It's used by the "right people" back in town or by unscrupulous villains
in interrogations. They just need to ask (or force) the subject to poke the
mushroom.

The subject must win a quick contest of **Will** against a skill of 16 to
prevent the 'shroom from narrating all their dirty laundry from the past seven
days. It will speak a string of nonsense words if the subject resists, and
experienced handlers will know what that means. The cage offers DR 7 against
swinging attacks and other impacts (such as dropping the device), but the large
gaps mean it doesn't protect against thrusting ones.

Recap Inquisitors cost $2000 and weight 10 lbs. Monthly maintenance requires
$100 in supplies and success in a **Naturalist** roll to keep the 'shroom alive.
