---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Kank"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-kank.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A jhakar, a stocky dog-lizard hybrid with a pug-like face.
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

Kanks are giant, beetle-like hive insects. A wild hive will viciously attack
strangers and intruders, but they're actually relatively easy to domesticate:
just start feeding them. After a while, the kanks will start seeing those who
bring them food as members of the hive.

Each hive has a queen that does little more than continuously lay eggs. The
larvae that hatch from these eggs can specialize in one of two ways:

Kank spitters are the hive's workers. Their duty is to forage for any sort of
organic matter and process it into a nutritive nectar that is used to feed the
hive (and extracted to feed people). They can store the noxious byproducts of
this processing and spit them at intruders as a form of defense, hence their
name.

Kank soldiers are very straightforward: they're big, they're strong, they have
huge mandibles. Their duty is to protect spitters from threats. When properly
trained, they're also extremely popular war mounts.

## The Numbers

Kank queens are too immobile to get combat stats, but we do get stats for the
other two types. Both are Natural Beasts with a ground speed of 8 and Resist 5
Acid and Poison.

### Kank Spitter

Spitters are Small but not defenseless. They're Level 2 Artillery with 30
HP. Their **bites** do a mix of untyped and acid damage. Their **Kank Spit** has
range 10. On a hit it does a little bit of physical damage, inflicts ongoing 5
acid damage, and slows (save ends). If the target was already slowed, it is
immobilized instead.

### Kank Soldier

These Large kanks are Level 4 Soldiers with 54 HP and the Mount tag. Their
**bite** is rather weak to start with, but it grabs on a hit. Once the soldier
has a grabbed victim, it can only bite that victim, but its bite attack gains +2
to attack and +10 to damage.

The soldier can instead choose to inject the victim with **Kank Venom**
(recharge 5+), an attack that targets Fortitude, slows, and deals ongoing 10
poison damage (save ends both). After the first saved throw, this worsens to
immobilized.

If serving as a mount, their benefit is **Grabbed Advantage**: this gives their
rider combat advantage against the kank's grabbed victim.

Kank soldiers don't have marking mechanics, but they don't need them. They'll
focus on a victim and try to keep it grabbed by their mandibles, using the venom
as a parting shot if they have reason to release the grab.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

I keep hearing about kanks in other Dark Sun Let's Reads, so it's nice to
finally put a (bug) face to the name, so to speak. They feel more interesting to
me than crodlus, both because they're beetles and because they have a use other
than "war mount" to their humanoid caretakers.

[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
