---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog!"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-cover.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    The book's cover, depicting several monsters including the Dragon of Tyr. Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


As I write this, RPGnet forum user zedturtle is just starting a Let's Read of
the Dark Sun Campaign Setting for 4e, and I thought I'd join in on the fun by
doing a parallel Let's Read of the Creature Catalog.

The Creature Catalog was published alongside the Campaign Setting in 2010, and
is the "second to last" monster book published for D&D Fourth Edition. The last
one would be Threats to the Nentir Vale, which I already covered and which can
be read either [in my blog][1] or on the [RPG.net forums][2]. It did still come
after the Monster Manual 3, and so enjoys the rules and formatting improvements
that came with that book.

The book opens up with a short description of the stat block format, and tells
us that the book is divided into two sections. "Monsters A to Z" is the kind of
thing you've come to expect from a monster book, and "Personages of Athas" is a
bunch of important NPCs and major villains like the Sorcerer Kings.

## Fourth Edition Monster Rules: A Refesher

I posted something similar at the start of every monster book Let's Read, and
I'll do so again this time, since it's been a while.

### Level and Role

Unlike 3e and 4e, Fourth Edition D&D doesn't have the concept of a "Challenge
Rating". Monsters instead have levels ranging from 1 to 30, just like PCs. A
monster's base attack bonus, damage, defenses, and HP are all based on its
level, with adjustments for its combat role.

A monster's combat role determines the monster's baseline stats and most of its
preferred tactics:

- Skirmishers are highly mobile melee combatants.

- Soldiers have good AC, accurate attacks, and usually some ability that helps
  draw PC attention to themselves. They form a "front line" that protects Team
  Monster's squishier damage dealers.

- Brutes deal heavy damage and have more HP, but are a bit less accurate and
  easier to hit. They're also good components of the front line, particularly
  when paired with soldiers.

- Controllers are good at both melee and ranged combat, and have lots of area
  attacks and other powers that impose negative conditions on PCs.

- Artillery monsters have strong and accurate ranged attacks, but are worse at
  melee and kinda fragile.

- Lurkers are fragile in a direct fight but have attacks that deal huge damage
  if certain conditions are met. Most commonly, that's when they attack from
  hiding. They have abilities that let them re-establish that condition, so a
  typical lurker will attack one turn and spend the next one hiding again.

In addition to this "primary" role, there are some extra roles a monster might
have. An Elite monster is worth two regular monsters, with double the HP and
some ability to perform multiple attacks per turn. A Solo monster is worth five
regulars, has four times the HP, attacks that affect a large number of PCs at
the same time, and usually some resistance to being "stun-locked". Minions are
weak monsters that deal half the damage for their level and always have 1 HP
(but cannot be damaged by missed attacks). Four to six minions are worth one
regular monster.

Finally, a monster tagged as a Leader will have abilities that enhance their
buddies somehow.

This [famous post][3] from the Blog of Holding has the individual monster design
formula written out as compactly as possible. This also shows us that it's easy
to adjust a monster's level on the fly, if needed.

### Origin and Type

Monsters also have an origin and a type, though that's more of a lore component
and doesn't affect mechanics like it does in 3e and 5e.

The origin tells us the place in 4e's cosmology to which the monster is most
closely tied, even if it's not currently where it lives. Each of the big planes
has its own origin tag. Natural monsters are from the natural world (known as
the "Prime Material" in other editions), Fey monsters from the Feywild, Aberrant
monsters are tied to the Far Realm, and so on.

Monster type is largely "vibes" based in a way I really like:

Beasts behave like animals; magical beasts look like animals and behave like
people; humanoids look and behave like people; animates are non-intelligent
things that move because of magic. A giant ant is a natural beast, an elf is a
fey humanoid, a shield guardian is a natural animate, a zombie is a shadow
animate.

Humanoid doesn't even mean "two arms and two legs": centaurs are fey humanoids!
I love this system. In previous readings, I tended to go with Int scores and the
like to guess if a monster was sapient or not, but in this one I'm going mostly
from the classification.


### Encounter Design

When designing encounters, the GM decides the encounter's level (which is
usually from 1 to 35). That and the number of PCs in the party gives them a XP
budget for the encounter. The easiest way to fill this budget is to add a number
of regular monsters equal to the number of PCs, of the same level as the
encounter. Obviously GMs can mix it up by varying monster levels, and adding
minions, elites or solos too.

Encounter level _doesn't_ have to be equal to the party's level. An "equal
level" encounter is considered a easy-to-moderate difficulty fight. Level-1 or
Level-2 are easy, and anything lower than that is not worth playing out using
the full combat rules. Level+4 or Level+5 are scary nightmare battles where
victory is no longer assured, suitable for final boss fights. Anything harder
than that will dramatically increase the chances of a TPK.

Encounters don't _have_ to be "perfectly balanced", not anymore than they do in
any other edition. What this system does is deliver _consistent_ encounters. If
you want them to be easy, they'll be easy. If you want them to be hard, they'll
be hard. The number of times where the opposite of what you want happens is kept
to a minimum. And that's why I love these rules to bits.


## Coming up Next

Starting from the next post, we'll get right to the monster entries!





[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/projects/tnv/
[2]: https://forum.rpg.net/index.php?threads/lets-read-threats-to-the-nentir-vale.904788/
[3]: https://www.blogofholding.com/?p=512
