---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Silk Wyrm"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-silk-wyrm.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A silk wyrm, which looks like a very large snake covered in a segmented
    green carapace, and whose grinning mouth is about three times as wide as its
    head.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

## The Lore

Silk Wyrms are snakelike monsters covered in chitinous carapaces. They're gifted
with many natural weapons: bites laced with paralytic venom and the psionic
powers of flight, camouflage, and mesmerism.

Though incapable of communicating in humanoid languages they're tenacious
endurance predators who employ clever hunting strategies.

Silk Wyrms will shadow their intended prey for days, looking for a time when its
guard is down. The book is not too specific about the nature of this prey. It
could be an adventuring party, a traveling caravan with humanoids and several
kinds of pack animal, or something like a pack of baazrags or other wild
animals. What matters is that the prey is easy to hunt and can be eaten "fresh",
because silk wyrms apparently only eat their victims while they're alive, and
abandon them when they die.

When their intended targets are vulnerable, the silk wyrm will sneak in,
paralyze a chosen victim, and devour them on the spot. If it manages to
incapacitate more than one victim it will drag one of them to its nest, where it
will trap them in silk strands and eat them over the course of the next few days
while they're still alive.

Silk wyrms band together as hatchlings, but as soon as they reach the adult
stage their deeply antisocial instincts take over and they set off on their own
to become lone hunters. Only after many years do they become wise enough to
overcome this instinct and start allying with other creatures. Some manage to
lead bands of their own younger kin, while others can ally with those creatures
whose telepathy allows them to communicate with the wyrms and buy their service
with easy food.

## The Numbers

Silk Wyrms are Natural Magical Beasts with the Reptile tag and Low-Light
Vision. All silk wyrms have a flight speed, but their flight is Clumsy, which
means they have a -4 penalty to attacks and defenses while on the air. This
means silk wyrms only fly to travel, but they prefer to fight on the ground.

We'll look at their other traits in each stat block below.

### Silk Wyrm Hatchling

Too frail to set out on their own, hatchlings roam the wastes in bands,
spreading out to scout for prey and emitting a loud chirping noise when they
find it to call their clutch-mates. They're Medium-sized Level 3 Minion
Skirmishers, with ground and flight speeds of 6.

Their **Blood Scent** trait means their attacks against bloodied creatures
ignore concealment. These will mostly be **bites** that deal poison damage and
slow for a turn. When the hatchling hits 0 HP, they release **Silk Strands** as
a last attack, which deal a bit of acid damage and restrain (save ends).

### Silk Wyrm Adult

In their "lone hunter" phase, adults are Large-sized Level 3 Solo Skirmishers
with 174 HP. Their flight speed increases to 8, but remains clumsy.

Adults retain **Blood Scent**, which works exactly the same way. They will
likely start the encounter in **Shadow Form** (minor, recharges when first
bloodied), which makes Insubstantial with Phasing and gives them +5 to Stealth
while stopping it from attacking. It can get out of this with a free action, and
will do so shortly after springing its ambush.

Once the wyrm appears in the middle of its targets, and again whenever the power
is charged, it will use **Mesmerizing Dread** (minor, recharge 4+), which deals
psychic damage to enemies in a Close Burst 5, slides them 3 squares, and
inflicts a -2 penalty to all defenses for a turn. Then it's bite time.

Their **bites** deal more poison damage, since they're not minions, and their
venom becomes stronger. The target is slowed (save ends), which worsens to
immobilized (save ends) on the first save and to helpless (save ends) on the
second failure. **Wyrm Strike** lets it bite two different targets with one
action.

Helpless is a funny and very worrying condition. It's funny because going
strictly by the book, you can move and act normally while Helpless. However
you're never _just_ Helpless. The most common way to get this condition is to be
unconscious. In this case, even on a strict reading you'll still be Restrained
when you fail your second save and become Helpless.

Being Helpless is worrying because it makes the victim grant combat advantage,
and opens them up to the Coup de Grace action, which is an attack with any
applicable power that auto-crits and kills the target outright if it deals more
than their bloodied value in damage.

If the Silk Wyrm manages to get someone immobilized, restrained, or helpless, it
will **Feed** on them, attacking their Fortitide eating one of their healing
surges, and healing 10 HP. There's no damage other than this, apparently, which
makes this attack a lot more forgiving in a fight than it would otherwise seem.

It someone hits the adult wyrm with a melee or close attack, it can respond with
**Silk Strands** as a reaction. This is a melee 3 attack vs. Reflex, dealing
acid damage and restraining on a hit.

### Silk Worm Elder

Elders have lived long enough to learn the value of teamwork despite or perhaps
_because_ of the loss of their ability to project silk strands in combat. They
band together with one another or with other powerful allies in order to survive
and keep eating. They're Level 14 Skirmishers with 125 HP. Not being solos, they
don't have a blanked +5 on all saves, but they still have that bonus on saves
against Immobilized or Slowed.

**Shadow Form** and **Mesmerizing Dread** work exactly the same, with Shadow
Form just making the wyrm Weakened instead of preventing attacks entirely. They
can only **bite** once per turn but their venom remains as potent as the
adult's.

The problem here is the damage: both Mesmerizing Dread and the basic bite do
exactly the same damage as the adult's, which is way, way below what it should
be for a level 14 monster.

**Feed**, on the other hand, does a huge chunk of physical damage (5d10+6) in
addition to deleting a healing surge. It recharges when first bloodied instead
of being at-will, but it no longer has any target restictions. They still really
want to use this in a helpless target if they can, because it's going to kill
any helpless target with 112 maximum HP or less.

Still, outside of their one or two uses of Feed, elders are significantly less
scary. The venom is still a concern, particularly if they have heavy hitters
with them, but barring errata it seems to me elders were made to rush in, use
Feed once or twice, and escape the fight using Shadow Form and **Serpent
Strike**, which they still have.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

I think the Lore section outlines possible silk wyrm encounters pretty well.

Mechanically, the first two seem okay to me, but the elder is weird. The damage
of their bites and Mesmerizing stare needs a buff. It'd make them more
consistently dangerous despite making their Feed attack a little less impressive
in comparison (as its 28 average damage is not a lot higher than the 22 their
bites would need).

[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
