---
layout: post
title: "Overthinking Shadowrun: Thematic Elements"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - cyberpunk
    - gurps
    - adaptation
---

Now that I have aired my feelings about Shadowrun and my wish to create my own
setting inspired by it, let's discuss strategy. I'm going to dissect both what I
like and what I dislike about Shadowrun in as much detail as my feeble mind can
manage, and I'm going to outline how I want Sinless to handle those things. And
I'm going to do it from the top down, using the same order described in GURPS
Adaptations, because that worked well for me in Dragon's Dogma.

This means that our first go-around is at the overall themes of the game. In our
previous post we've already established that the game is all about the Rule of
Cool, but we can still try to find out what else the game is about when we look
at the way it's written.

Let's take a look at the prefaces for a few disparate editions. I have in front
of me the text of the First, Fourth and Fifth editions, plus Anarchy. Let's see
what you can read in each of those as soon as you open the book and get through
the preambles. You're either browing the book in a store or you've just bought
it and are sitting down to read it for the first time. The writers want to get
you excited about the game so you'll want to read through the rest of the
substantial tome you have in your hands, and they have limited space to do it.

## First and Fourth Editions

The first thing I find is that the SR1 and SR4 prefaces are surprisingly
similar. They're clearly versions of the same text separated by a couple decades
of alteration by multiple writers and editors. You can see that they're trying
to get the same information across:

- This is the future.
- Both advanced cybernetics and magic are things that exist.
- They are hella cool.
- The world has been through a lot of chaos and turmoil.
- Megacorps basically control society.
- You are a badass who lives in the cracks they don't control and who makes a
  living performing dangerous and often illegal jobs for pay. You are often
  hired by those megacorps.

The ways in which they're different already display some of that tonal shift I
mentioned in my previous post. That's another thing I found surprising, as I
thought the shift wasn't evident until you reached published adventures and late
supplements.

The SR4 preface is much longer than the SR1 version despite taking up less page
space (SR4 uses a double-column layout). A lot of that extra verbiage is spent
trying to introduce and explain game-specific terms like nuyen, SINs, and BTLs,
which IMHO is a mistake. You shouldn't need to stop and explain acronyms in your
preface. As a result the SR1 version ends up feeling snappier than its
successor.

There are also some subtle but important wording changes here. At the point
where both texts describe the megacorps. This is what the SR1 version has to say
about them:

    Central governments were replaced by Mega-Corporations, which were a law
    unto themselves. People who accepted their sovereignity were protected. The
    outcasts, dissidents and rebels were exploited and abused, as it always had
    been between the weak and the powerful since time began.

As you can see, the language above is clearly sympathetic to these "outcasts,
dissidents and rebels". Both "exploited" and "abused" are strong negative words
that immediately predispose you to dislike the abuser.

The SR4 equivalent says this instead:

    Megacorporations have become the new world superpowers,
    a law unto themselves. The entire planet speaks their
    language; the nuyen has become the global monetary stan-
    dard, and the highest court in the world is the Corporate
    Court, made up of members of the top ten megacorporations.
    The megacorps play a deadly game, paying pawns in the shad-
    ows to help them get an edge on the competition. Meanwhile,
    corporate executives and wage slaves hole up in their own
    enclaves, safe behind layers of security and indoctrination.
    Outside the walls of these arcologies and gated communities,
    whole stretches of the sprawls have become ungovernable.
    Gangs rule the streets; the forgotten masses grow, lacking even
    a System Identification Number (SIN) to give them any rights.
    These outcasts, dissidents, and rebels live as the dregs of soci-
    ety, squatting in long-abandoned buildings, surviving through
    crime and predatory instincts. Many of them attempt to rise
    above their miserable existences by slotting addictive Better-
    Than-Life (BTL) chips, living vicariously through someone
    elseâ€™s senses. Others band together, some for survival and some
    to gain their own twisted forms of power.

Not only does this snippet try to introduce three relatively minor concepts and
explain two acronyms, it's also a lot less sympathetic to the rebels. It makes a
point of saying they can only survive in their "ungovernable sprawls" through
"crime and predatory instinct", with their only escape being drugs or gaining
"their own twisted forms of power". This implies that the forms of power
attained by people on the corp side are not twisted, though I grant that may be
a bit of a reach.

Meanwhile the people in the corporate enclaves are "safe behind layers of
security and indoctrination". Yeah, "indoctrination" isn't a very positive word,
but "safe" sure is, as is "superpower" and sentences like "the entire planet
speaks their language" would probably sound positive to an American audience.

Both of them end up mentioning that you will often be doing dirty jobs the
megacorps didn't want to do themselves, but only SR4 goes out and calls you
their pawn. It does off-handedly mention that some shadowrunners take on
missions for moral reasons, but most of the descriptions of what they do fall
under the umbrella of "sometimes illegal and always unsavory".

I'm sure this is no way intentional, but these two versions end up looking like
they were written by people living on different sides of the wall separating the
Sprawl from the corporate enclave. Now, I was never shy about admitting I like a
lot of the stylistic changes SR4 brought to the game, but this is certainly not
one of them. When it comes to Shadowrun, I side with the outcasts, and so I
prefer the original SR1 preface. That version also ends with a huge illustration
of an awesomely grungy troll with a nail bat, which only improves it in my eyes.

## Fifth Edition

The SR5 version is completely new, and shorter than even the SR1 preface. It
tries to make the reader imagine themselves as an armed badass facing hordes of
security guards in a mission gone wrong, and it leans hard on the question of
"Will you pay what it costs to be the best?" It runs through a list of potential
missions and mentions "The Man trying to keep you down" in a somewhat
perfunctory fashion. The emphasis is all on "being the best!". Have you got what
it takes? Sure you do! Read on!

As _marketing copy_, this preface feels a lot more effective. It immediately
tugs at your inner enthusiastic 11-year old while leaving the fiddlier details
of the setting to be explained by the rest of the (quite large) book. It also
gives us some important clues about the new editorial direction of the game.

See, SR5 is where they tried to take a more considered thematic approach, and
they settled on "Will you pay what it costs to be the best?" as the main
theme. The bit about "The Man trying to keep you down" is also interesting. It
sounds like an attempt to bring back some of SR1's anti-authoritarian bent, but
to me it also sounds like the book's heart isn't really in it. In those online
discussions I've participated, that specific language was most often used by
people who were opposing the stance that shadowrunners should fight against the
abuses of the corps rather than enable them.

## Anarchy

Anarchy's preface is the most disappointing of all, since it's merely a
nostalgia-filled letter from its developer about how we all know and love
Shadowrun but some of us don't have the time to grapple with its voluminous
rules anymore, Here's some lighter ones that are in no way a new edition of the
game, so put the flamethrowers down already. Judging from the preface alone,
Anarchy does not come across as a book aimed at Shadowrun newbies.

## Moving On...

If I was reading a Chronicles of Darkness book, this is about the point where I
would see a longer introduction on what the game is actually about and what
themes it tackles. How does Shadowrun handle that part?

As far as SR1 is concerned, what you see in the preface is all you get.
