---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: Character Races"
category: gurps
---


  {% if jekyll.environment == 'production' %}
  {% assign custom_url = site.url | append: site.baseurl %}
  {% assign full_base_url = custom_url | default: site.github.url %}
  {% else %}
  {% assign full_base_url = site.baseurl %}
  {% endif %}

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/top_main_chara.jpg" | prepend: full_base_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2013 Capcom</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

After covering occupational templates in some detail, it's time to look at
racial templates. What options do players have for creating non-human
characters?

The default answer is "not many". The original game started out with a more
traditional fantasy setting containing all the default races, but was eventually
developed into the setting we see when playing it. _Humans_ make up the bulk of
civlization in Gransys and the rest of the world. A minority of alien _Pawns_
are the only nonhumans who are also part of it.

There are other non-human sapients around: _Goblins_ and their _Hobgoblin_
cousins clearly have a civilization of sorts, and the various species of
_Saurian_ (humanoid lizards) are fairly sophisticated tool-users. However, their
views of humanity run between "fun to torment" and "tasty", with humans holding
an equivalent low opinion off them. Peaceful interaction between these species
is vanishingly rare. Other sapient monsters (such as the _Harpy_ and _Dragon_
families) are even less appropriate as player characters!

Below you will find two racial lenses for the Arisen and the Pawns. These can be
used as-is in the Dragon's Dogma setting presented in this blog, or in a more
traditional DF setting if the GM is willing to bring in the cosmic baggage that
comes with them. In those settings, the lenses can be applied to members of any
playable race, giving you characters such as elven Arisen or halfling Pawns.

But first, let's briefly discuss a setting element tied to both of these lenses:

## Setting Element: The Rift

The world of Dragon's Dogma is touched by the Rift, an interstitial realm that
appears as a dimly lit, fog-covered plain. The Rift connects multiple worlds,
and is the original home of the Pawns. The Dragon comes from somewhere beyond
it. The points where it touches the world are marked by _Riftstones_, and the
Arisen can use those to interact with the Rift.

We'll reveal much more about it in future posts, but for now it's enough to know
that the existence of the two racial lenses shown below in a setting also
implies that it's touched by the Rift and contains Riftstones. GMs using
different settings that already possess similar "planar travel" elements might
want to use those instead, or to integrate the Rift with them.

## The Arisen (10 points)

The Arisen are those people who dare stand against the Dragon when it first
enters the world. For this, they are marked in a mystical ritual where the
Dragon consumes their heart. The stolen heart still beats within the beast, and
so the victim rises again compelled to confront it once more.

Only one person is usually made Arisen on each draconic invasion, though it's
possible for multiple Arisen to exist at the same time. It's not common
knowledge, but the Arisen do not age while the Dragon who marked them
lives. Those who failed to confront the beast in previous invasions might still
be around! The Arisen also commands the loyalty of the Pawn Legion, and is able
to direct them in a far more effective manner than a mundane commander could.

Having no heart, the Arisen also have no pulse or heartbeat. The ritual also
leaves a very large and distinctive scar in their chests, which is the same
shape for all of them. This scar can be covered up fairly easily, but it
sometimes glows through any clothing or armor when in proximity to a Pawn or a
draconic being.

They are widely respected in any society that is aware of their existence, but
that comes at the cost of being expected to confront the Dragon. Jealous or
snobbish nobles also like to impose "tests of skill" to Arisen characters so
they might prove they are "worthy" of the station.

The Arisen are portrayed as being unusually capable in the original games,
though it is unclear if this comes from their condition or if they were chosen
for being heroic in the first pÄºace. Either way, Arisen PCs shouldn't be built
on less than 250 points.

**Advantages**: Injury Tolerance: No Vitals (Heart only, -50%) {3}; Hero 2 {10};

**Disadvantages**: Unnatural Features (No hearbeat, occasionally glowing scar)
{-3}[^1];

**Features**: Unaging[^2].

### Arisen Power-Ups

Most Arisen tend to acquire the company of an extremely loyal Pawn shortly after
being marked, known as their Main Pawn. If this Pawn is an NPC, then it can be
bought as an Ally (100% of points, Available Constantly) {20}.

## Pawns (-15 points)

Any world subject to the cycle of draconic invasion is riddled with rifts that
open to a foggy place beyond it. From these rifts comes the Pawn Legion,
familiar yet alien.

Pawns, also known as "Myrmidons", have no childhood, and no parents. They spring
fully grown from the stuff of the Rift. Some are created by an Arisen, others
seem to be spontaneously generated, and some are brought over from other
worlds. Despite this artificial origin, they are very similar to humans
physiologically and still need to eat, drink and sleep as normal. All have a
"birthmark" of sorts in the palm of their right hands, shaped like an Arisen's
scar and known as the "pawnprint". This mark sometimes glows when in the
presence of an Arisen.

The main difference between a human and a Myrmidon is psychological. From a
human's point of view, Pawns have a cold and detached demeanor that makes them
hard to relate to. Even when they do display emotion, they seem somewhat
off. They also seem to have a problem displaying significant personal
initiative, which is why most of them make a living as errant mercenaries,
singly or in small groups. Unlike most standard fantasy races, the average
Myrmidon is an adventurer. It's the "civilians" who are the vanishingly rare
exception. Regardless of their profession, all Pawns consider themselves to be
members of the "Pawn Legion", and never fight each other.

Pawns are unaging, and have very long memories. Those who feel particularly
well-disposed towards their master or employer might offer a constant stream of
advice drawn from these memories in an attempt to be more helpful. Fortunately,
they can be taught to tone it down.

Pawns directly created by an Arisen are unflinchingly loyal to their creator,
and all Pawns are predisposed to respect any Arisen they meet. Should they be
treated well by such a person they will gladly work for free if asked.

When a Pawn is killed, their body dematerializes. They can be drawn back to life
from the Rift by an Arisen. This weakens the Pawn's metaphysical cohesion, so it
can only be done a limited number of times.

**Advantages**: Eidetic Memory {5}; Extra Life (Requires an Arisen and a
Riftstone, -40%) {15}.

**Disadvantages**: Hidebound {-5}; Low Empathy {-20}; Social Stigma (Minority
Group) {-10}.

**Features**: Unaging[^2]; Reacts at +2 to Arisen; Cannot be resurrected by any
other means.

### Pawn NPCs

In the original game, all Pawns are AI-controlled characters, and their
psychological traits as described above are a justification for their in-game
behavior. It's similarly easy to make them NPCs in a tabletop campaign: any
sufficiently-sized city will have a small contingent of Pawns ready to act as
hirelings for an adventuring party. They're a little cheaper than equivalent
human help, which compensates for the increased supervision their lack of
flexibility requires. They're still smart enought to refuse to work for a party
who purposefully endangers or mistreats them! Word gets around, even among
Pawns.

### Pawn PCs

PCs can choose to play a Pawn as well. In that case, simply use the racial
template above with the same type of template used by the other PCs in the
campaign. If another PC is an Arisen, then the Pawn PC will likely be their Main
Pawn.

If no other PC is an Arisen but someone still wants to play a Pawn, it's
recommended that the GM either change the limitations on the character's Extra
Life or include an NPC Arisen who might perform the service of restoring the
dead Pawn. If neither appeal, feel free to delete this advantage and the
resurrection-related feature from the racial lens, making it worth -30
points.

### Pawn Power-Ups

Pawns who serve an Arisen for a long time or who develop strong relationships
with non-Pawns might find their own souls strengthened by these bonds. They may
buy more instances of Extra Life for 15 points each. Additionally, they may buy
off the Low Empathy and Hidebound disadvantages from the lens. Extraordinary
circumstances might allow a Myrmidon to buy off the entire lens and become a
full member of their base race.

[^1]: Gives +3 to any roll to identify you as Arisen. Identification is
    automatic when the scar glows!
[^2]: Not worth points in a Dungeon Fantasy game.
