---
layout: post
title: "How I Like My Actual Play Reports"
tags:
    - actual-play
    - opinion
    - gurps
---

I love me some Actual Play reports - you know, when people write up what
happened in their sessions and publish it for the world to see. I started
reading them a few years ago with the excellent [Broken Diamond][1] Mage
campaign over at RPG.net, and today I follow several blogs and similar sites
containing more. Of particular interest is Peter V. Dell'Orto's [Dungeon
Fantastic][3] blog, which chronicles his long running Dungeon Fantasy campaign
and a few others besides.

The why of it is pretty simple: I like good stories, and the fact that these
in particular emerge spontaneously from the interaction of the group gives them
a bit of extra spice. It's also an excellent font of ideas for my own
games. There's no need for that first step of figuring out whether the ideas in
question would work in a game, because they already have!

Then there's the _how_. Writing up session reports is as much of an art as
writing any other kind of fiction, which means there are many different ways to
do it. I've started reading a lot of reports that looked extremely interesting
at first, only to eventually drop them because the format was not to my liking.

Overall, I'd say my preferred format for an Actual Play report is a relatively
short narrative summary of the session. It must give me a real sense of who the
characters are, tell me what happened without getting into too much system
detail, and do so in at least a somewhat engaging manner. That's what I strived
for when writing my own reports for my [short X-COM campaign][2]. Broken Diamond
and Dungeon Fantastic above are other examples of this form.

If you have the same preferences as me then that description might sound
obvious, but it's not! I've found several other styles of report around that I'm
sure work very well for their authors, but which let me a bit cold.

The first I ran into were the verbatim chat logs. Obviously, those are for games
conducted over text chat. They're quite a bit easier to record than the
summaries I described earlier - just set your chat application to automatically
log the session, or, alternatively, copy and paste the whole contents of the
window when it's done. Perform some minimal editing if necessary, and then
publish.

I find the chat format doesn't feel as engrossing to me as a narrative
summary. Aside from the format these types of play report also include all of
the back and forth between GM and players as they discuss a character's next
action or crunch the numbers on the rule system. It's still faster to read than
it was to play through, but every "lull" in the pacing translates directly to
the text.

After that I ran into gaming podcasts. They're really popular among groups who
play through voice chat. There's some post-production work involved,
particularly among the more "professional" podcasts, but the bulk of the
material comes from simply hitting a "record" button at the start of the
session. This results in something that feels, to me, like a more "intense"
version of chat logs. No detail is left out - you hear everything as the players
themselves heard it during the game. This includes every pause to check the
rules, every roll of the dice during a fight, every out-of-character joke... and
listening to it all takes exactly as much time as it took to play through
originally. That usually adds up to 3-4 hours _per session_. These podcasts
aren't something I can just leave playing in the background while I do something
else, either. I have to pay close attention to what is being said if I am to
make sense of it at all, particularly because most groups who opt for recording
audio-only seem to be comprised of a bunch of dudes with really similar voices.

And then there's video. It's the next logical step after a pure sound
recording. I find this easier to follow, because I can see who's talking and
associate voices with faces. It still has all the same downsides of an audio
recording, though: it takes as much time to experience as the session took to
play. I had to look long and hard until I found one of these video recordings I
could watch all the way to the end, and I'm going to talk about it in the next
post.

So yeah, summary text is still king for me. Do you prefer another format? Tell
me about it on the comments!

[1]: https://forum.rpg.net/showthread.php?279847-Actual-Play-Mage-The-Awakening-The-Broken-Diamond-(contains-Reign-of-the-Exarchs
[2]: {{ "/projects/gurps-xcom-reports/" | absolute_url }}
