---
layout: post
title: "Condensing Hell's Rebels - Adventure 01"
tags:
    - gurps
    - pathfinder
    - dnd
---

If you're familiar with Pathfinder adventure paths, you probably know they tend
to have quite a bit of padding to them. This is because they're designed to take
the group from level 1 to a set maximum level, and they closely adhere to the
game's XP system while doing so.

This means that these adventures must make their PCs go through a certain amount
of _stuff_ that rewards the prescribed amount of XP. Some of that stuff is
quests, as in "award the group this much XP for completing this goal", but most
of it is going to be fights.

That can result in a lot of filler! There's one famous example in the Iron Gods
adventure path where its whole third volume (out of six) is basically a wild
goose chase that could have been completely ommitted by placing its McGuffin at
the end of the dungeon on volume 2, where it originally was.

I've seen blog posts in the past "condensing" these adventure paths by removing
all the filler and making them as direct as possible. This is very useful when
you're running them in a different system like GURPS Dungeon Fantasy, where
characters start out powerful and don't necessarily gain XP from fights. It's
also excellent when you're using the native system with milestone advancement
instead of a XP tally. That way you just advance the PCs to the proper level at
the right times, so it doesn't matter if you take the filler out.

In this post, I'll try to do this with with the first volume of Hell's Rebels,
the one with the ridiculous title of "In Hell's Bright Shadow".

## Part 1

In [Part 1 of the adventure][1] everything from the initial scene at the Aria
Park protest to Rexus Victocora's rescue should remain as-is. These scenes open
the adventure with a bang and set the early stakes of the campaign.

We can tweak the events that follow this meeting for maximum story progression
speed.

- The grimples in the old hideout under the Livery are not evil and will try to
  parlay with the PCs. They will grant safe passage through their territory in
  exchange for the PCs dealing with the "terrible demons" in the other half of
  the dungeon.

- If you don't want to deal with Blosodriette's extended sabotage later on, you
  can either remove her entirely or ensure the PCs detect her early. Depending
  on their starting power level the PCs might already have the necessary
  abilities in the Livery, or you might arrange for them to find an item that
  will help them do it in one of the following missions.

- The situation with the tengu sisters is different. Chough does not exist. Nan
  Comerivos brought them here as written, and then left saying he'd try to find
  passage out of town for them. However, he never came back. Laria knows the
  sisters are down there and has been keeping them fed, but they want to find
  out what happened to Comerivos because he's their only way out.

- Some legwork by the PCs will let them discover that Nan Comerivos has been
  taken to the **Salix Salt Works**, which is being used as a forced labor camp
  just like in the original. Comerivos and the sisters can join as NPC allies
  once the former is rescued.


## Part 2

This would be the [sandboxy part of the adventure][2] after the PCs recover the
Silver Raven cache. We've already rolled Prisoners of Salt into Part 1. I'm only
going to keep one other encounter: **Crackdown at Clenchjaw's**, which nets the
PCs an awesome fairy dragon ally if they play things right.

Having discarded the murder mystery from Adventure 01, I'm going to reach into
Adventure 02 and pull in the **Temple Hill Slasher** storyline to replace it. DF
PCs should be able to take care of him directly and it should provide the
"combined" reputation boost from both mysteries. This is what gets the Silver
Raven name back into the city's rumor mill.

They can work both of these cases while growing the rebellion in the strategic
layer and possibly dealing with Blosodriette's sabotage in between.

For a more abstracted experience you could also remove the strategic layer
entirely. Have it be managed by allied NPCs, and before each big dungeon delve
you can give PCs the option to apply the effect of one or more covert ops. These
would usually require tests using rebellion stats, but they often eliminate the
most tedious parts of the ensuing delve so applying them automatically is not a
bad idea.

## Part 3

Just before Rexus deciphers the Silver Raven documents, the PCs receive an
invitation for a meeting with Lady Mialari Docur, who originally only appeared
in Adventure 03. She's an acquaintance of Laria's here, and makes the same offer
of alliance she makes there. From this point on she provides her bonuses and
access to her school's services. That's mainly a network of couriers that can
deliver secret messages and smuggled items, though she could also act as a
source of illegal spy hear.

You might also want to introduce Chok the tengu weapon shop owner here as
another acquaintance of Laria's. He has a role to play in adventure 04, but
that's also where I first saw his name mentioned at all, and that book expected
him to be a long-time ally. Having him appear him as one of their weapon
suppliers is more organic.

After Rexus deciphers the documents, a process the PCs can help speed up, we go
into **Hocus' Phantasmagorium** as the [big capstone delve][3] of the
volume. This remains mostly as-is.

## Conclusion

As I mentioned back in [part 1 of the Let's Read][1], I'm in favor of using
250-point delvers to start with, but scaling the challenges as if they were for
lower-powered PCs. So the expectation here is that the PCs breeze through these
early scenes and get their rebellion on a steep upward trajectory as soon as
possible. Our heroes have absolutely no need of filler encounters here, so I'm
keeping only the ones that add something directly to the
rebellion. Theoretically they would be already strong enough to raid the
Phantasmagorium from the start.

If you can manage to make your fights move at a good clip, I estimate this would
take about 5-6 sessions to run through. A single session for Part 1, 1 or 2 for
part 2, and the rest for part 3 since it's a bigger dungeon crawl.


[1]: {{ "/2017/05/10/hells-rebels-adventure-1.md" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2017/05/27/hells-rebels-adventure-1-part-2.md" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2017/06/21/hells-rebels-adventure-1-part-3.md" | relative_url }}
