---
layout: post
title: "Condensing Hell's Rebels, Volume 02"
tags:
    - gurps
    - pathfinder
    - dnd
---

Here we continue to condense the Hell's Rebels adventure path, focusing now on
its second volume, "Turn of the Torrent". Like before, I'm writing this with
GURPS Dungeon Fantasy PCs in mind, and with the assumption that they should
require no filler fights to be strong enough for the main challenges of the
story.

## Part 1

We start with a bit of downtime during which the PCs learn about the city's
noble houses from Lady Docur, and can start researching them to see which ones
are amenable to supporting the rebellion. The main change here is that House
Aulorian is still undecided, which should change soon.

After a bit of "downtime" where the PCs busy themselves management and
information gathering, they get contacted by Lictor Octavio directly. He sets up
a meeting with them at his cousin's tavern, the Tooth and Nail, and asks the
Silver Ravens to rescue his knights who have been made prisoner. We skip all the
bits about tracking down Octavio.

The **Holding House** delve occurs as originally written. Posing as dottari with
prisoner transfer orders is still the best solution here, and should allow them
to skip everything but the kyton fight.

## Part 2

With the Temple Hill Slasher quest happening early, the only one left here is
the **Poison Pen of Kintargo**. The rescue happens as written, for the same
romantic reasons, but I want to make Captain Sargaeta into a less morally
ambiguous figure. Instead of being a Chelish patriot, he's Andoren and keeps no
slaves. He otherwise remains just as useful to the PCs as originally
written. This is both more palatable to me and ensures good PCs will accept his
help, which makes a lot of things easier in the rest of the adventure path.

## Part 3

The **Lucky Bones** is our big capstone delve for this volume, and I would argue
it's _too_ big. There are three entirely separate "levels" here with little
relation to each other.

Personally, I'm not a big fan of underwater dungeon crawling, so I'm going to
cut the delve into the flooded level. There is just the one skum encounter in
the first flooded room, and after that's dealt with (possibly via tossing
explosives into the water) you can narrate the exploration of the empty level
and the rescue of the sea elves as a "cutscene". Everything else remains as it
is.

For even more condensation, remove the cultists entirely and beef up the numbers
and power of the undead in the haunted sublevel to compensate. We want to
streamline the adventure without making this final sequence too easy.

## Conclusion

Though the volume 1 article still ended up a bit chunky, we are now moving at a
fair clip!
