---
layout: post
title: "Condensing Hell's Rebels: Volume 4"
---

Early modules in a Pathfinder adventure path tend to be full of filler, since
their main job is to get the PCs to a level where they can challenge the
adventure's actual villains and not just their underlings fifty steps down the
hierarchy.

This Hell's Rebels module is when we start to actually challenge those
villains. It's also special because its end makes a very good stopping point for
the campaign if you don't want to deal with the "epic tier" stuff that comes
next.

## District Missions

If you like the whole Assassin's Creed feel of going into special delves to take
control of districts and steadily progressing towards the rebellion's main goal,
then there's little you can cut here. Most of these delves are short, consisting
of one big fight, and the enjoyment you would derive from doing them is worth
it.

If you do want to streamline this part as much as you can, you can reduce it to
the following sequence of encounters:

- **Bleakbridge**: The important bit here is not the fight against the generic
  opposition occupying the bridge, but the negotiation to bring the River Talons
  on board. Have the scene center around this negotiation, and if the PCs
  succeed, you can say the River Talons handle the guards offscreen.

- **Kintargo Keep**: This one is still relatively short but leads to the rescue
  of Jackdaw, who is one of the most important NPCs in the campaign's
  backstory. It feels right for the PCs to be present for that.

- **The Dragon**: Fighting a dragon is kind of a dungeon fantasy rite of
  passage. Kill it and you earn your Certificate of Badassitude.

If you want to track Authority, you can say each of these knocks 35 points off
when successful.

## The Temple of Asmodeus

We can't really remove the capstone dungeon for the module... but we still can
streamline it. Let the PCs have the temple map automatically. Maybe an offscreen
covert op succeeded, or maybe it was in the Records Hall. Point out where the
entry points and infernal engines are, and have an NPC point out the optimal
route if the PCs didn't think of it.

Keep any encounter groups who are capable of joining in the central fight, or
who are guarding the infernal engines. Remove Barzilai - he's hidden away in
some inaccessible panic room and won't join the defense of the temple. Remove
everything else.

The Belfry encounter remains the same.

The boss fights in here are still going to be formidably hard, but this will let
the PCs bypass most of the "trash fights".

## The Silver Span Celebration

This part remains the same.
