---
layout: post
title: "Condensing Hell's Rebels, Volume 3"
tags:
    - dnd
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
---

We enter volume 3, Dance of the Damned, moving at a fair clip. Let's see if we
can keep up the pace.

This adventure would mark the point where things stop being easy to our
delvers. We're aiming for a standard Dungeon Fantasy level of challenge from now
on, in line with their actual power level.

In particular, Parts 2 and 3 can potentially feature fights against large groups
of opponents of varying power if the party is careless. These are no longer
supposed to be walks in the park. Being smart about taking on these groups is
totally worth it.

## Part 1

This is just the first Silver Council meeting. We already introduced much of its
preliminary order of business in previous adventures: Lady Docur in adventure 1,
noble hobnobbing in adventure 2. So all that would be left to talk about would
be the matters of foreign support, along with any table-specific developments
that might have happened due to previous PC efforts.

## Part 2

As I mentioned in the last article, I'm not a big fan of underwater
adventure. So the village of Acisazi is actually fine, and the reason they're
joining up with the Ravens is that Aava was a big shot back home. A NPC Silver
Raven team can escort her and the other scouts home, while the PCs pursue the
other regional support goals. Those can be done in any order.

## Part 3

The Vyre banquet happens as written, it's too fun to skip. One option might be
to give the party a further boost at the banquet if they close the Menador Gap
before coming here. The city will be more convinced of their ability to see the
revolution through.

## Part 4

The Menador Gap delve also happens as written. Be sure to reward clever play by
the PCs and allow them to bypass as much of the fort's security as it makes
sense given their actions. Remember the soldiers aren't telepathically linked,
and a group or individual who spots the PCs needs to raise an alarm before the
rest become aware of them. The PCs are more than capable of preventing that if
they try. Also, they don't need to kill every last soldier in the place to
succeed at the mission.

## Part 5

This also happens as written. Again reward clever play by the PCs when it comes
to exploring the opera house in secret and taking out the opposition ahead of
time.

## Conclusion

We retain much of the original adventure here, but that's fine, as the retained
bits are cool and have a direct relation to the main plot. If they manage to
thwart the Ruby Massacre and defeat the attending enemies, give them time to
explore the rest of the Opera House and possibly find Jillia Bailinus and
Shensen, as doing this now will speed up events in the next volume.
