---
layout: post
title: "Condensing Hell's Rebels: Volume 5"
---

The main goals here are: discovering the Kintargo Contract's conditions,
ratifying a mayor, and unifying Ravounel so it's also protected by the
contract. If you want to condense this process as much as possible, here's what
we do.

## The Contracts

Despite the book's insistence, you can easily write Odexidie out of the story
and skip his entire office dungeon.

Both contracts could be deciphered by scholarly allied NPCs offscreen, and in
any case the information available on a quick skim of the Kintargo Contract is
already enough to point the PCs in the right direction. Jackdaw knows the names
of the five Board families, so they can start on that particular quest right
away.

Alternatively, if you want the PCs to experience the visit but don't want to
make it a full delve, you could say Barzilai wrote the password on the back of
Oddie's note. It's exactly the kind of stupid shit he'd do.

## Gathering the Board

This part is pretty speedy already, since it's mostly roleplaying. It can remain
as-is. For some added action you could work in the Greenbriar Fetters mission by
saying they kidnapped one of Geoff Tanessen's sons. Rescuing the son would sway
him to the PC's side.

## Uniting Ravounel

For maximum speed, cut this out entirely and replace it with a big "cutscene"
summit where some new and familiar NPCs (Manticce, Athannah, the strix
chieftain, Xerelilah) appear to sign the treaty. If you want to keep some of the
quests, I'd suggest the Ravounel Forest one.

## The Real Temple Hill Slasher

I think one serial killer plot per campaign is enough. If you used the one from
adventure 2, it's safe to cut this one out.

In this version of events the Slasher never managed to reach the Soul Anchor in
life, despite researching it obsessively. He just doesn't come back. The PCs get
called in to clear his old hideout when an Alabaster Academy employee discovers
it by accident. It's empty save for the haunt that might connect a PC to the
Anchor and for whatever loot the GM wants to give the PCs.
