I find myself thinking about Transhuman Space a fair bit these past few
days. This is a game that always bugged me in ways that I find hard to explain
even today (this is like, the fourth version of this text). I figure I ought to
try anyway.

It's not the tech. The tech is fine!  It's not the transhuman props. Sapient
octopuses are a hoot! It's not the space. Space is cool!

Transhuman Space positions itself as a reaction to the cyberpunk RPGs of the
Nineties, but when I _really_ look at it I discover THS is just as much a
product of the Nineties as those games.

Yeah, yeah, the core book came out in 2002, but that means it was likely written
around 2000 or 2001, if not earlier. And the Nineties as I think of them lasted
from the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 to the fall of the World Trade Center
in 2001.

1989 is also the year when Francis Fukuyama made his "End of History" speech. Of
course it did not take long for a whole lot of people to realize the end of
history they were getting was the _sharp_ end. But if you were standing at a
safe enough distance from all the bleeding and screaming, it was possible to
believe that things would only get better and that the promise of the future
would trickle down to everyone.

I believe that this is part of the reason why those Nineties cyberpunk RPGs were
so ridiculous in the first place. Their writers wanted games set in a future USA
that resembled Neuromancer, but they had a hard time believing that such a thing
could come to pass since the natural course of history was so self-evidently
positive. So they filled their extensively detailed timelines with all sorts of
horrible disasters to justify things getting worse. Shadowrun was particularly
egregious here, with enough plagues, wars, volcanic eruptions and nuclear
explosions to put most post-apocalyptic games to shame.

THS positions itself as a reaction to these games by proudly declaring that its
own extensively detailed timeline is free of disaster. I remember lot of the
praise for the game centered around the fact that it was more "realistic" than
its contemporaries. This often referred to the technology, but it was just as
often directed at the setting's optimistic view of the future. In short, it
embraced the End of History narrative instead of trying to work around it. And
_that_ is what bugs me about Transhuman Space.

The introduction to Chapter 1 if the core book admits the setting still has its
problems. It even lists global warming and inequality as the two biggest ones,
with the latter being made worse by the fact that the rich can buy better
genes. Almost immediately, though, it says they are ultimately irrelevant in the
face of the infinite future made possible by advanced space technology.

While the game is notoriously lacking in details about what a group is expected
to _do_ in the setting, it's quite clear on who they're expected to _be_: those
rich people who can afford better genes. To me Transhuman Space feels very much
like cyberpunk written from the perspective of the antagonists.


































Transhuman Space bills itself as an optimistic game, and that optimism is
founded on three main pillars:

- There are no disasters in its timeline of the future.
- Technology advanced unhindered by politics or accident and made people's lives
  better.
- Advances in space travel have made the future "infinite" by giving humanity
  access to vast resources extracted from the solar system.

These are all laid out in the introduction to Chapter 1 of the corebook, the
rest of which is taken up by the timeline. The same introduction also says that
the world still has problems. It mentions global warming still being a thing,
and two whole paragraphs to the issue of social inequality and the specific
shapes it can take with all this advanced tech ("the rich can buy better
_genes_").

However, those problems are described shortly before the text mentions the third
"pillar" above. The message here seems to be that those "infinite" resources
coming in from space exploitation have made all of these problems eminently
solvable. Things keep getting slowly better for everyone, and given enough time
and technological advancement all of these lingering problems will be done away
with.

The book doesn't say this explicitly, but it's clearly positioning itself as a
reaction to the type of future you typically saw in cyberpunk RPGs of the time,
like CP2020, Shadowrun, or even Cyberworld (the setting that goes with GURPS
Cyberpunk). My vague recollection of online discussions I glimpsed at the time
were that the book's authors as well as its most ardent fans were vehement in
rejecting any suggestion that the setting was any kind of cyberpunk.

And yet, the whole thing is one tiny shift in perspective away from being a
setting that pays closer attention to the central themes of literary cyberpunk
than any of the RPGs its reacting to. The thing that really bugs me about it all
is that this shift is not just absent from most of the line's books, but
activelly rejected by the setting's fans. And without it, Transhuman Space will
never feel like _my_ future.

You see, literary cyberpunk settings were never true dystopias. Most of them do
not, in fact, have big disasters on their timelines. The problems plaguing their
societies are pretty much the exact same ones described in the THS
introduction. The difference is that the cyberpunk genre focuses on characters
on the receiving end of those problems, while THS focuses on the people who can
afford to ignore them.

While THS is notoriously vague about what groups are supposed to do in a
campaign, there's still a strong sense that you should be doing it as characters
from Fifth Wave nations. That's where all the coolest gadgets and the most
exotic PC types are. Everywhere else are just places where the future hasn't
really arrived yet. The book recommends setting short introductory campaigns
there to ease your players into the setting. The fans tend to ignore them
completely, judging from those online discussions I've taken part in.


The core book lists Alvin Toffler, Richard Dawkins and Ray Kurzweil in its
bibliography, and their influence is pretty obvious. But it also seems to have
been pretty influenced by Francis Fukuyama and his ideas about the "end of
history". There's many wonders yet to be discovered in THS's 2100 when it comes
to AIs or nanotech, but if you're talking political or economic systems then the
game is of the opinion that we already got there in 1999. Every nation or power
bloc in 2100 still has political and economic systems that would be perfectly
familiar to someone in their 20th century counterparts. The ones at the top of
the heap are pretty much what you'd expect: the US, the EU, and China.

===========================================================================

To explain this in more detail, I think it's helpful to first tell you about
this short story by William Gibson titled _The Gernsback Continuum_.

It's about a photographer who gets hired to travel through the US and take
pictures for an art book, of buildings built using this very specific sort of
40's-50's architecture. You know the one: aerodynamic fins and flanges
everywhere, meant to look "futuristic". Of course, the story takes place in the
80s so everyone there knows the future these buildings were alluding to never
came to pass. That's what the art book is going to be about, that nostalgic lost
future feeling.

[gas station image here. Caption: sometimes the fins have flanges].

Our protagonist gets so into it that after a few weeks, close to the end of his
gig, he starts hallucinating that future. Silver teardrop-shaped cars driving on
the highway or flying in the sky above it. A plane that's a huge flying wing
with thirty-six propeller engines and two ballrooms.

It culminates in an entire city (Tucson, IIRC) visible on the horizon being
replaced by a version of itself that's all impossibly tall flanged towers linked
by crystal roads and swarming with those silver cars and with Beautiful People
in Togas. There's a couple of them right beside our protagonist, though they
don't see him. They talk to each other with sweeping gestures and bold
statements that can be summarized as "Isn't the future great? And it's all
ours!"

At that precise moment, our protagonist freaks the fuck out. When I first read
this story[^1] I was a dumb teenager so I didn't quite get what was so horrible
about that moment, but now I do. Every one of those Beautiful People in Togas is
white, blond and blue-eyed. _What the heck did they do to everyone else?_
Perhaps that lost future never coming to pass is a very good thing indeed[^2].

The story's title refers to [Hugo Gernsback][1], the man responsible for editing
the science fiction magazine _Amazing Stories_ from 1926 to 1936. I'm guessing
everything our poor photographer sees comes from that magazine, too, or from
other publications influenced by its style. Gernsback also lends his name to the
Hugos, one of the two top literary prizes in the field of SF.

William Gibson, of course, was one of the founding members of the literary
cyberpunk movement, which was a reaction to this sort of utopic and kinda creepy
science fiction. He's won a few Hugos himself.

As the introduction to Guardians of Order's _Ex Machina_ so aptly puts it,
cyberpunk stories were about outsiders trying to survive and find happiness in
the face of an oppressive society. Cyberpunk protagonists, Gibson's in
particular, were often criminals, drug addicts, poor kids, people of color, or
more than one of the above at the same time.

The futures depicted in those stories were high-tech, but they weren't
"clean". One of the central concepts of the whole thing was that the world
wouldn't magically become a better place just because technology had
advanced. Trash from the "old world" lingered everywhere, both literally and in
the form of its social structures and social problems. If you don't address
those in the present, they will keep being problems in the future!

Cyberpunk was a huge success because it addressed the anxieties of the present,
and soon it spread to other types of media. The aesthetic of those first books
generally made it through more intact than their core themes, particularly when
it came to RPGs. By the late 90s, cyberpunk RPGs were games where mohawked punks
(or trench-coated operatives) traded a large chunk of their humanity for shiny
chrome implants and went on violent heists against big corporations in a
hopelessly shitty future made up of concepts of the late 70s and early 80s. The
"trade away your humanity" and "hopelessly shitty world" bits were never
actually part of literary cyberpunk!

In comes Transhuman Space. The introduction to Chapter 1 of the core book
clearly positions this setting as a reaction to the cyberpunk of 90s RPGs. Like
those games it has an extensively detailed timeline, but it's entirely devoid of
sudden cataclysms that kill a lot of people and make everything go wrong. Its
2100 still has to contend with problems like global warming or social
inequality, but thanks to rapid technological advancement people lead better
lives than their ancestors did in the 20th century! Space exploration has gotten
us out of the zero-sum game and made our future truly infinite!

Ah, _there_ it is. That's the bit that bugs me. THS's outlook on the future is
surprisingly similar to that of the Gernsback Continuum.

THS is obviouslly not a stealth Nazi utopia, I don't mean it in that sense. It
has plenty of support for characters of many varied ethnicities, cultural
backgrounds and sexual orientations, and for people who were never human to
begin with. But it's similarly optimistic in believing technological advancement
is all it takes to make the world a better place. Every nation in 2100 has more
or less the same relative standing it did in 1999, with more or less the same
political system. Here's a setting that says "Francis Fukuyama was right, we
reached the end of history".

THS is notoriously vague about that player groups are supposed to _do_ in its
setting, but the general tendency is to push them towards being law-abiding
citizens of Fifth Wave nations. Fifth Wave (AKA "First World") nations all have
the best technology, all developed by giant corporations who enforce their
intellectual property with maximum prejudice[^3]. Don't worry, though,
corporations have learned to plan for the long term instead of only seeing the
next quarter's profits, so they're trustworthy stewards of humanity's culture
and development. Really!

Playing in a less developed Fourth or Third wave nation is recommended mostly as
a way to ease players into the setting. Playing a cyberpunk-style "outsider" is
not _explicitly_ frowned upon, the ones you see mentioned in the book are all
monstrous criminals, terrorists, or dirty commies.

Oh yes, there's something called the Transpacific Socialist Alliance here, which
is made up of countries who question the copyright maximalism of the Fifth Wave
nations. The game maintains its strictly neutral journalistic tone when talking
about them but for some reason the TSA is only ever portrayed as antagonistic in
adventures and adventure hooks. Its governments are authoritarian and they're
apparently only able to innovate technologically when it comes to creating
weapons of mass destruction - the rest of their tech is all ripped-off Fifth
Wave intellectual property. No need to worry, though! The Fifth Wavers have just
defeated them in a war before the game's official start date, so they're on the
wane. TSA sympathizers are everywhere, but our ubiquituous surveillance can
catch them almost before they think of breaking the law!

In short, the whole thing is _remarkably_ close to what I would expect of a
cyberpunk setting that followed the literary themes more closely and updated its
technology and social issues to be more in line with the latest
predictions. Giant corporations and the governments that love them. Copyright
maximalism as a point of contention. Global warming. Conflict between a young
generation coming of age and a much older one who refuses to let go of
power. Social inequality amplified by the fact that the very rich can buy
themselves better genes. About half the playable character types aren't even
considered people in many jurisdictions.

You have to respect the research that seems to have gone into identifying these
issues, because other than the last two they're all relevant to the real-world
of 2018. But the same text that lists these issues seems to turn around and say
hey, it's all good! Why would you worry about any of that stuff when it's sure
to go away as technology advances a little more?

I'm sure a lot of people were happy to take that advice to heart, but it didn't
feel like _my_ future. I remember getting into a few online discussions back in
1999-2000 where I struggled to explain this, being a dumb teenager at the time,
and got reactions from enthusiastic fans that amounted to "Those Third Wave
yahoos don't know how good they have it." Thing is I kinda am one of those
yahoos, and for the countries THS considers Third Wave the "end of history" has
traditionally meant the _sharp_ end.

Of course, shortly after that 9/11 happened. We all learned you don't need to
kill half the world's population to make things fall apart. Then we got the
Crash of '08. Then the US got Trump. Then we got Bolsonaro. And that's just the
highlights from my very limited perspective! There's whole books worth of bad
between each of those events.

What I'm saying is, THS not only gives me those Gernsback Continuum feelings
because of its general attitude, it now also feels about as dated. Even the tech
seems to have been a tad too optimistic[^4]. Those whacky cyberpunk RPG
timelines look a lot closer to what we actually got, in tone if not in
details. Gibson himself is still going strong, with his latest novel _The
Peripheral_ combining the themes of classic cyberpunk with THS-style technology.

So I guess cyberpunk wins. Yay?

[^1]: Which wasn't long before I first read the THS core book, come to think of
    it.

[^2]: The protagonist gets rid of the hallucinations through a steady diet of
    headline news about the oil crisis.

[^3]: If they don't then anyone with a home printer could have all the cool
    stuff they wanted, and that way clearly lies chaos and social ruin.

[^4]: It turns out you probably _can't_ upload yourself to the cloud and live
    forever. Sorry, Ray.


[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hugo_Gernsback
