---
layout: post
title: "Hacking Without a Hacker"
tags:
    - gurps
    - cyberpunk
---

Whether called a hacker, a decker, or a netrunner, the person who invades
computer systems and makes them do things features prominently in the stories
most cyberpunk RPGs take inspiration from, and so often ends up being a vitally
important archetype in those games. However, they tend to have a very mixed
track record when it comes to actually presenting you with a hacking system
that's fun and bug-free.

This means there are many possible reasons for why you might find yourself
planning a cyberpunk game but have no cause or wish to use its hacking
rules. Maybe none of the players wants to be a hacker, or maybe the group just
doesn't like the rules of the game in question. In those cases, a popular
suggestion is to include a NPC hacker, and in this post we'll discuss a way to
do so that keeps the rest of the group reasonably involved in the hacking. Rules
are for GURPS, but the concepts can be easily translated to other systems.

It's not immediately obvious to us here in 2023, but the earliest iterations of
Shadowrun's Matrix and CP2020's Net were based on a pre-Internet model of
networked computing. Strip all the futuristic terms from their description and
you'll find out you're dealing with 80s mainframes. When you keep that in mind,
it actually makes sense that a hacker would be able to access them remotely.
Finding the unlisted phone number for the mainframe's modem is half of the
challenge to getting into it, and it's gonna contain the secret data you're
after because it handles everything computer-related for its facility.

But we _are_ in 2023, and we want to do things differently. Even small companies
can afford to have completely separate servers for each important function, and
the ones your group wants to hack are not usually not connected to any outside
networks. That requires a physical break-in, and when there's a PC hacker it
acts as an incentive for them to stick with the rest of the group. They need to
be there for the actual hack, and they can contribute in other ways until then
while being subject to the same risks as the other PCs.

But we don't want our NPC hacker to stick with the group! NPCs who can't protect
themselves turn the adventure into that most dreaded of slogs, the Escort Quest;
those who _can_ run the risk of becoming the equally dreaded GMPCs. So our
hacker has to work from home. How to square this with a target server that
requires a physical presence, though?

The answer, surprisingly, comes from the computer game _Warframe_.

## The Datamass

How do you hack an isolated internal network located in a building that blocks
all outside radio signals? With quantum bullshit, that's how.

A _datamass_ is an armored, briefcase-sized device that incorporates several
kinds of data cable plus micro laser and IR communicators and a small radio
(GURPS Ultratech pages 43-44). All of these are connected to a sizable amount of
quantum-entangled matter. Datamasses are made in pairs, entangled with each
other, and allow high-bandwidth communication and data transfer between elements
of the pair through any amount of barriers or interference. They have DR 10, HP
8, cost $5000 for the pair, weight 5kg (10 lb) each, and are LC1 (AKA _super
illegal_). They also include an emergency self-destruct switch that melts the
internals of both elements of the pair when

A datamass pair is similar in concept to the causality communicator in
Ultra-Tech page 45, but _much_ cheaper.

In your typical cyberpunk setting, datamasses were first invented as
super-secret espionage tools by a major government or computer-focused megacorp,
and initially gave them a major leg up in one of the many ongoing cold wars
between such entities. The secret of their existence soon leaked, however, and
an enterprising independent engineer figured out they were quite easy to make
with a properly modified home 3d printer. Yes, even the entangled matter. The
plans for a home-baked datamasses were soon made widely available on the Net,
and they keep popping up no matter how much effort the corps spend to squash
them. That's why they're relatively cheap.

Datamass technology is going to be really revolutionary when FTL travel is
invented in the distant future, but for now it's mostly used for its original
purpose, and allows teams of plucky street mercs like the PCs to operate at the
same level as crack corporate commandos when it comes to high-level
espionage. If the PCs are hired to do a hacking mission, they will usually be
provided a datamass pair, but they can also buy their own from the usual illegal
channels available to PCs if they want to be enterprising.

Any world that has this kind of tech probably never developed "classic"
cyberdecks, since you don't need to cram all that power into a portable form
factor.

## Take Your Decker To Work

In a setting that has datamasses, hacking missions look a lot like the Warframe
"mobile defense" missions these devices come from. The PCs need to sneak into
the target facility carrying a datamass, and find a place where to connect it. A
direct cable connection is best. An internal wi-fi network will do in a pinch,
but will make everything that follows take longer.

The NPC hacker sits at some remote location operating a high-tech hacking rig
connected to the other datamass of the pair. They'll join the PCs comm network
and help secure it. Once the party connects them to the target server, they
begin the hacking session proper.

Since the hacker is an NPC, you don't need to roll anything for the actual
hack - you just need to give the PCs a time frame for when it will be done. And
then they must stay near the datamass and guard it until that much time has
elapsed. If they snuck in, they need to find a way to maintain stealth and
divert security attention from their access point. If they're found out, it
turns into a fight, but they still must stay until the hack is done or it will
fail. For added Fun(TM), a difficult mission might require the party to do this
several times from different access points.

The remote hacker isn't a panacea - any obstacle that can be handled by the PC's
own tech skills _should_ be. But they do save you from having to engage with
your game's hacking rules. Success at the actual hack is entirely dependent on
your group's ability to get the datamass where it needs to be and keep it there
for the required amount of time. This is going to feel different from an escort
quest, since an inanimate object can't get into trouble on its own.

The self-destruct switch is useful for when the hack is done, as it allows the
party to leave without having to lug the datamass back out. It can also prevent
the hacker from being traced if the device is captured. Or it can be used in a
double-cross that leaves the team stranded in enemy territory without network
support. Use that last one sparingly!
