---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: Goblins"
category: gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/DDENEMIES.jpg" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>Copyright 2012 Capcom.</figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

    We eats when we wants and sleeps when we're tired of eating!

    - Goblin Motto

This post is part of a series converting Dragon's Dogma enemies to **GURPS
Dungeon Fantasy**. Please go [here][1] for links to all other posts in the
series.

In the [last post][2] we saw that Gransys has a serious bandit problem, but it's
not nearly as bad as its _goblin_ problem. Even armed, an individual goblin not
much of a threat to anyone trained in fighting. The real problem starts when
they band together. The danger posed by a force of goblins grows out of
proportion to their individual might, as they quickly organize themselves under
the leadership of "goblin kings".

Despite this, they don't have anything resembling a complex culture: there's no
goblin language, and "goblin art" is almost an oxymoron. Goblins live in
mountain caves and obtain most of their complex tools by stealing them from
humans. A goblin king is simply a goblin who's smarter or stronger than usual
and who manages to browbeat a group of his fellows into obeying. Capable enough
monarchs soon find themselves in command of a small army, and might manage to
even enslave larger monsters such as cyclopes. Much of the Duke's strategy with
those centrally-controlled border fortresses aims to protect Gransys from goblin
raids originating in the mountain chains west of the duchy.

Smaller groups are everywhere within Gransys, operating like more chaotic
bandits. Despite their common interests, goblins and human bandits don't get
along well - goblins are just as happy to attack _them_ as they are to attack
civilians.

## Goblin

Your average goblin is a small humanoid with reddish skin, pointy ears and
teeth, and cat-like eyes. They're rarely more than about five feet tall, and
their intellect is nothing to write home about. They uses improvised or scavenged
weapons.

<sample goblin. SM -1, similar to a Guard but with skill 12 or less; Laziness
and Cowardice>;

## Hobgoblin

These are much bigger and stronger than normal goblins. It's unknown whether
they are a separate species or not, but a group of them can often be found
bossing smaller goblins around. Hobgoblins are more sophisticated than their
smaller, lazier cousins: they can make their own equipment and are more skilled
and disciplined in combat. Despite this, individuals aren't all that smarter
than normal goblins.

<sample hobgoblin. Similar to a Brute. Bully and Bloodlust or Sadism>

## Variants

Not all goblins are average! These variants can apply to either goblins or
hobgoblins.

### Goblin King

This is a remarkably intelligent member of the species, able to forge the usual
goblin rabble into a more efficient fighting force. Raise IQ to 10+, add one or
more levels of Born War Leader and the skills covered by that talent. The
smarter and more talented the king, the larger the force they can command!

### Goblin Mage

Some exceptional goblins delve into the arcane arts rather than contenting
themselves with brute force. Minor shamans with IQ 11, Magery 1 and around 10
spells are as likely to lead small goblin bands as a king. More powerful
examples exist as part of larger communities or deep in the mountains.

### Grimgoblins

These terrible creatures hint at the true origin of goblins. They look like an
albino version of normal goblins or hobgoblins, but are much more dangerous than
either! Most people have never seen one, and think they are a myth. The coming
of the Dragon will make them see their error.

Change Class to _Demon_. Raise ST by 5, DX and HT by 2, combat skills by 2 or
more. Add Immunity to Metabolic Hazards. Grim Kings and Mages are proportionally
smarter and more dangerous as well.
