---
layout: post
title: "The Great Dungeon Fantasy Shootin' Showdown"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

Gather round, friends! Come one, come all! Witness the greatest event to grace
our fine kingdom since the dragon attack last weekend! Here in our arena are the
three delvers most deadly at a distance, ready to finally see who's the
deadliest of them all!

This is not a contest of accuracy! We know that each and every one of these
brave warriors can hit the bullseye clear across the arena every time they
fire. No, dear spectators, this is a contest of _speed_! The contestant who
fires the most shots in a minute wins!

Our contestants are Legs, the non-binary Elf Scout with their trustly longbow;
[Harsk][1] the male Dwarf ranger with his heavy crossbow; and Layla the
Gun-Witch with her flintlock target pistol. So how fast can they go?

## Legs

Legs is a 250-point Scout with Heroic Archer, Bow-20 and Fast-Draw
(Arrow)-14. Each second, they can make an unmodified Fast-Draw (Arrow) roll to
instantly ready an arrow _and_ a Bow roll at -3 to instantly load it into the
bow. Success at both allows them to shoot at -3 to skill.

We're assuming every attack our contestants get to make will hit the target:
it's a small arena and no one is in danger. But how often would Legs get to
fire?

Legs will succeed at 90% of their Fast-Draw rolls - in a minute, that's 6
failures. Each one represents a missed opportunity to fire that second. They
would also fail roughly 2% of their Bow rolls, which would mean another 1
failure out of the remaining 54 chances. So Legs the starting character would
shoot 53 arrows in a minute.

That's an impressive performance in real-world terms. Can we improve it even
further?

The most immediate improvement can be had by increasing Fast-Draw to 16 for 5
points. At that skill level we're only failing 2% of our rolls, meaning we'd
fire a total of 57 arrows that minute! A single extra point would buy us the
Flawless Fast-Draw perk from Pyramid #3/61: The Way of the Warrior. That would
allow us to consider all of our Fast-Draw attempts automatic successes,
increasing our number of shots to 58.

Another point would buy Legs the Flawless Nocking perk from the same Pyramid
issue, finally bringing us to that perfect 60 for a total of 7 points.

This does assume Legs shifted some of their starting points around to get Bow
from the template-standard level of 18 to 20. If they hadn't done that, they'd
need another 4 earned points here to bring it to 19 in order to qualify for
Flawless Nocking, bringing the improvement cost here to 11.

## Harsk

Our old friend [Harsk][1] has Heroic Crossbowman, Crossbow-20, Fast-Draw
(Arrow)-15, and the Quick-Reload perk. Quick Reload is from **GURPS Gun-Fu**,
where it's described in terms of how fast you can reload guns based on their
feeding mechanisms. The crossbow version is described alongside Harsk himself,
requiring Heroic Crossbowman (unlike the gun versions, which are considered
realistic) and allowing him to cock and load his crossbow in a single second
with a successful Fast Draw roll. He can then make a Crossbow roll at -3 to
finish readying it and fire at the same turn (also at a -3 penalty).

His higher base skill levels would mean he would only fail 2 Fast-Draw rolls and
1 Crossbow roll in that minute. However, a failed Fast-Draw roll would mean he
wastes _three_ seconds instead of one, bringing his total shots fired to 53.

Bringing his Fast-Draw to 16 and buying Flawless Fast-Draw would cost 3 points,
making it a very worthwhile investment that brings his total to 59. Another
single point would buy him Flawless Nocking and bring his total to 60.

Do note that Harsk is built on the same template as Legs, so the same
considerations about starting skill apply. Had he not bought Crossbow-20 to
start with, the total CP cost of that perfect 60 would go from 4 to 8, with the
extra paying for Crossbow-19.

## Layla

Layla the Gun-Witch is built on the Gunner template from Pyramid #3/36. She has
Gunslinger, Quick Reload 4, Guns (Pistol)-19 and Fast-Draw (Ammo)-16, and is
firing the Pistol from the same Pyramid issue, which is a smoothbore flintlock
with RoF 1 (20). This seems to make her the underdog in this competition. Can
she catch up?

Four levels of the Gun Fu version of Quick Reload means she can reload that gun
in three seconds flat. Still, if we leave it at that, our gun-witch would lose
the quick-firing competition by a wide margin. Even with sucess at Fast-Draw,
she will only fire once every 4 seconds, allowing her to land 15 shots in that
minute. There's not enough rolls in there for her to fail one in this time
period, but if it did happen she'd take ten seconds to reload instead of 3,
lowering her total by another 3 shots.

Pyramid #3/36 doesn't include much that can make her fire any faster - its
rationale is that Dungeon Fantasy guns make up for their lower fire-rate by
having higher damage and longer range. The article's suggestion for Gunners who
want to fire every turn is to carry a brace of 10 or so derringers instead of a
single pistol, with Fast-Draw allowing them to fire one each turn and discard it
(and do slightly less damage than a bow). Doing this would improve Layla's score
only until she ran out of loaded guns, so unless she brings 60 of them she catch
up to her fellow contestants.

### Helping Layla Out

What if we wanted guns to be more awesome in our campaign, at least when wielded
by an ultra-skilled delver PC? What extra benefits could we give Layla to let
her catch up?

Perhaps we could take some inspiration from the crossbow version of Quick Reload
that we gave Harsk. You see, the gun version is described by Gun Fu as
_realistic_, which means we could make it even more awesome for
Gunslingers. So let's say that for Gunslingers, the minimum reload time is 1
second, not 3.

Another option would be to also allow her to quick-ready her loaded gun, like
the others can do with their own weapons. That would be a

If we port the quick-ready rule for use with guns, Layla could
make a Guns-3 roll to ready the pistol instantly and fire every 3 seconds
instead of 4. That would allow her to land 20 shots in that minute. Still not
enough!

Harsk has a cinematic benefit to his Quick-Reload perk, allowing him to reload a
crossbow instantly. We could do something similar for Layla, and say Gunslinger
would allow her to ignore the 3-second minimum time for black powder
weapons. That would allow her to buy 4 levels of the perk and load her pistol
instantly.

Combining this two rules gets Layla making Fast-Draw and Guns rolls every turn,
both at -3.
