---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Dungeon Fantasy Adventurers: Holy Warrior"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

As the book says, Holy Warriors are on a quest to bury evil six feet deep. Like
the Cleric, they receive blessings from the gods, but they prefer stabbing to
casting. Those Other Games call them "Paladins" or "Champions".

A Holy Warrior is a bit worse at _general_ combat than a Knight, but they're
potentially much better at fighting specific types of foes like demons and
undead.

## Basic Stats

The Holy Warrior's statline is ST 13, DX 13, IQ 12, HT 13. Their Will is
increased to 14 and their Basic Speed reduced to 6.

At a glance, that seems like it'd make them excellent generalists, but as the
intro says their other traits make them more specialized.

## Advantages

All Holy Warriors start with these advantages:

- One level of **Born War Leader**: This is a Talent, a leveled advantage that
  boosts certain skills. In this case, it boosts skills used in tactical
  planning and leadership, and gives a positive reaction bonus from professional
  soldiers and fighters.

- One level of **Higher Purpose (Slay Demons or Slay Undead)**: Pick one of the
  two when you create your character. Each level of this gives a +1 bonus to
  basically every roll you make while trying to fulfill the purpose. This does
  include attack and damage rolls! While you're not obligated to attack your
  chosen nemeses on sight, you cannot back down from a fight with them once it
  does start.

- Two levels of **Holiness**: This is an alternate "Power Talent" for Holy
  Might. It gives bonuses to power rolls but unlike the Cleric's Power
  Investiture doesn't let you cast spells.

- **Rest in Pieces**: A 1-point advantage that guarantees that any living foes
  you slay cannot return as undead.

You have 50 more points to distribute among discretionary advantages and Holy
Might abilities. The advantages have the usual stat boosts, including extra
levels of Higher Purpose and Holiness, plus stuff that makes you better at
fighting in general or that gives you the usual "paladin resistances" to
poisons, diseases, and fear.

## Disadvantages

Once again you're required to take a -10 disadvantage representing the oaths you
took to gain your Holy Might. Typical holy warrior choices here are Honesty, a
Sense of Duty towards all Good entities (like angels and such), and a Vow to own
no more than a horse can carry. That last one is a delver-friendly vow of
poverty. You can still have a very nice suit of armor and a bag full of powerful
weapons, but not own land or ships or other big-ticket symbols of wealth.

The rest of the suggested disadvantages once again take you into one of the
"virtuous saint" or "intolerant inquisitor" modes of thinking.

## Skills

You start with either skill 18 in a two-handed weapon, or skill 16 in a
one-handed weapon and a shield. Suggested holy warrior weapons are polearms,
spears, and swords.

For ranged combat, you learn either Crossbow or a thrown weapon skill.

Other mandatory skills include remedial unarmed combat lessons, all the stuff
enhanced by Born War Leader, and more in depth knowledge about your chosen
nemeses in the form of Hidden Lore, Psychology and Physiology specializing in
either demons or undead.

Optional skills cover the usual generic delver set, plus extra monster knowledge
skills for the _other_ enemy monster type.

## Special Holy Warrior Traits

Higher Purpose, Holiness, and Rest in Pieces are exclusive holy warrior
traits. They can also increase their will to a maximum of 25 instead of just 20.

And then it's Holy Might time again! Holy Warriors cannot cast spells, but they
can buy any of the powers and esoteric skills from the Cleric entry, and also
have another list of stuff here that might be useful for them. Clerics can also
buy these powers if they want. Their respective power talents give bonuses to
any required rolls.

- **Detect Good** (9 points): Like Detect Evil, but for supernaturally Good
  artifacts, locations, or beings. Very useful for rescue missions.

- **Heroic Feats** (9 points/level): By the Honor of Greyskull! You call upon
  the powers of the gods to grant you a temporary boost in your physical
  abilities once per game session.

  There's a version of this power for each physical attribute, and each of those
  has two levels. Each level gives you +1d to the targeted attribute, and once
  active the bonuses last for 3d seconds. Holiness does not give bonuses to
  these rolls.

  Buying 2 levels of all three heroic blessings costs a total of 54 points. A
  single 1-second Concentrate maneuver lets you activate all your blessings at
  once, or as many of them as you like if you want to save some for later.

  I think this power is awesome, but the random bonuses and random duration are
  a drag. I wrote an alternate set of rules for this [a long time ago][1]. The
  TLDR on that is that I use a fixed +4 per level, and have the blessing last 10
  seconds. That lets you pre-calculate all the changed stats from your increased
  attributes when you "transform".

- **Resist Evil** (1 point/level): Adds its level to rolls to resist the innate
  supernatural powers of Truly Evil creatures. Holiness doesn't increase this
  bonus.

## Customization Notes

The point of playing a Holy Warrior is to have wide access to Holy abilities and
be very good at smiting supernatural evil, so the book recommends going all in
on that. If you just want to fight well in general, pick a Knight or
Swashbuckler.

It's harder for a Holy Warrior to "multiclass" into a Cleric than it is for the
Cleric to do the reverse - your GM would have to allow them to turn Holiness
into Power Investiture and pay the difference. If all want are the Cleric's Holy
Might powers, though, you don't need to do anything extra. You already have
access to them!

Between both lists, you can assemble the entire set of classic paladin powers,
but you won't have enough points to pick everything up at character
creation.

As front-liners, Holy Warriors would definitely benefit from spending those
quirk points on extra money.
