---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Dungeon Fantasy Adventurers: Knight"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

Knights specialize in _fighting_, and are better at it than nearly anyone
else. They favor heavy armor and, well, "knightly" melee weapons. Their name
refers more to this than to their social status, which is as highly variable as
that of any other delver. In the book's own words: "... Knight sounds better
than Fighter (so generic!) or Thug (offensive!)."

So yeah, this is the equivalent of D&D's Fighter class, but it's a lot more
honest about representing a specific type of combatant, and also about their
capabilities: when they say the knight is good at combat, they _mean_ it. As you
might already be able to tell, they're my favorite template.

## Basic Stats

The Knight's starting statline is ST 14, DX 14, IQ 10, HT 13. Their speed is
reduced from 6.75 to 6.00.

They have the second highest base ST, losing only to the Barbarian.

## Advantages

Knights start with 2 levels of the **Born War Leader** talent, plus **Combat
Reflexes** and **High Pain Threshold**. None of these are exclusive traits, but
the last two are major boons to anyone who plans to engage in combat and Knights
are the only profession that always starts with both.

Born War Leader means Knights are much better at their profession's main mental
and social skills than their average IQ 10 would indicate.

They have a whopping 60 points to put into further discretionary traits, all of
which make them better at either fighting or leadership.

Of note here is **Weapon Master**, which boosts their skill at arms from merely
"unrealistically good" to "superhuman". This advantage reduces penalties for
multiple attacks and defenses, gives access to some special skills, and gives
them a major damage boost with the weapons covered by the advantage. Knights are
not the only profession that has access to this: Martial Artists, Scouts, and
Thieves also have it. But Knights are the only profession with access to the
version that covers _all weapons_, if they're willing to pay the 45 points it
costs.

## Disadvantages

Knights need only choose -35 points of disadvantages here, as their reduced
Speed makes up for the rest. The available choices of personality problems here
let you make anything from a callous and unpleasant thug to a crusty veteran
soldier to a chivalrous hero. You also have a small selection of physical
disadvantages representing old battle wounds.

## Skills

All Knights have the skills to use a shield and any one ranged weapon of their
choice, as well as some unarmed combat training. The melee skill packages offer
the choice between skill 20 at any one weapon, skill 17 at two, or skill 16 at
three. Do you want to master your chosen weapon, or do you want to be able to
use anything that can show up on a random loot table?

I've seen people not take the Shield skill and instead move its points to a
weapon skill, increasing it by 1. That would indeed let them start with skill 21
in a weapon.

Other skills include the tactical and leadership stuff boosted by Born War
Leader, and they can pick a few from the full gamut of universal delver lore
plus Intimidation.

A Knight is likely to start with fewer skills than many other professions, but
there's nothing preventing them from learning more with earned points. And they
can start out very, very good at their main job, so they can start branching out
earlier.

## Special Knight Traits


Knights can buy extra HP up to 1/2 their ST, instead of just 1/3. Also, they can
buy new weapon skills or improve existing ones with earned character points
_instantly_ at any time - even mid battle!

They also have exclusive traits. They're not magic - the Knight is just that
good.

- **Armor Mastery** (5 points): When you wear any armor with DR 2+, increase its
  DR by 1. This reflects your skill at actively using the armor, turning your
  body so blows always strike the strongest parts.

- **Rallying Cry** (5 points): Unleash the Warlord in you! This lets nearby
  allies who are mentally stunned (from surprise or enemy powers) immediately
  make a Will roll to recover. If they succeed they immediately lose the defense
  penalties from being stunned and can act normally on their next turn.

- **Sacrificial Block** and **Sacrificial Parry** (1 point each): These let you
  attempt these defenses on behalf of someone else who is in reach. The Block
  works for allies who are behind you, the Parry for allies who are beside
  you. Roll as if you were defending yourself, and if you succeed your ally is
  protected as if they had succeeded.

- **Shield Mastery** (15 points): Any shield you use gains +1 to its Defense
  Bonus, and you gain an extra DR 2 against cone and area attacks if you can
  interpose your shield. Captain America probably has this.

- **Shield Wall Training** (1 points): This lets you use your shield to block
  attacks on behalf of an ally who is beside you, and eliminates the penalty for
  attacking while holding a large shield.

## Customization Notes

You can use this template to make any "heavy fighter" archetype, from an
european-style knight to a samurai to an Amazon to Guts from Berserk. It's all
about weapon and disadvantage choice. The book also says it's important to
decide if you want to completely master a single weapon be decently skilled in a
wide variety of them. High skill is definitely powerful, but there's value in
keeping your options open in campaigns where the GM is enthusiastic about
random loot tables.

As a personal note, I'm going to say Weapon Master is so good it feels almost
mandatory. Few things are more dangerous in the battlefield than a ST 17+ Weapon
Master Knight who focuses on a single big swingy weapon like a polearm or
two-handed sword. By the time the wizard finishes charging that fireball, all
enemies in the field will already be dead.

No matter your specific build, you definitely want to spend quirk points on
extra money for an armor upgrade.
