---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read DF Adventurers, Chapter 1: Basics"
tags:
    - gurps
    - lets-read
---

This chapter talks about the basics of character creation, and explains what the
game's most fundamental stats mean.

The basic process of creating a character in DFRPG is simple: you go to chapter
2, pick a professional template, and select your final traits from several
shopping lists presented in that template. This tends to be a lot faster than
creating a character from scratch in core GURPS, particularly for people who are
new to the system. We'll talk more about the templates when we cover chapter 2.

## Character Points

Each ability listed in those templates has a cost in **Character Points**, and
each professional template has a total of 300 points worth of abilities. Their
point total adds up to only 250, however, since they also have 50 points worth
of "problems" that have negative costs and inconvenience the character in
various ways. We'll see later that you gain more character points as you play,
and those can be used to either improve your abilities or get rid of those
problems. There's no special "XP" here like you might find in other games - the
points you gain from adventuring and 2use to advance are the same kind as the
ones you spent during character creation, and all trait costs remain the same.

The concept of "level one" does not apply here: templates are tuned to be
seriously good at their main jobs from the start. I'd say they have roughly the
same power as level 7 or 8 D&D 3.x characters, though there are some important
differences in how they play that I'll get into when we discuss chapter 2.

Experienced GURPS players can try their hand at making freeform characters
starting with the same 250/-50 total, though even in this case I'd recommend
starting from a template and changing to taste - they're just that
useful.

So what do these points get you? A character sheet is made up of several
different types of traits. This chapter describes the two most basic types in
detail, and mentions the others (which get their own chapters).

## Basic Attributes and Secondary Characteristics

Basic Attributes, henceforth known as simply "attributes", measure how strong,
quick, and smart your character is and influence everything they do. Each one
also helps determine one or more Secondary Characteristics, derived values that
are just as important to your character. These characteristics can also be "fine
tuned" and increased or decreased directly, again costing points or giving them
back depending on the direction of change.

**Strength (ST)** determines your capacity for dealing physical **damage**, your
**Basic Lift** that measures how much you can lift and carry, and your **hit
points**. GURPS HP does not have the abstract fuzziness of its D&D counterpart -
its hit points are "meat points". The meatier you are, the more HP you have, and
this total does not increase in any other way.

The sole mental attribute, **Intelligence (IQ)** is the basis for every mental
skill in the game. It also determines your **Perception** and **Will**, which as
you would expect are used for noticing things and resisting mental Bad
Stuff.

**Dexterity (DX)** is your overall agility and coordination. It's the basis for
nearly every physical skill in the game.

**Health (HT)** is a measure of your stamina and your resistance to Bad Stuff of
a physical nature, including unconsciousness and death when your HP goes below
zero. A few physical skills that are more dependent on stamina than coordination
are tied to HT. It also determines your **Fatigue Points**, which you spend in
order to perform exhausting tasks or fuel special powers.

DX and HT together determine your **Basic Speed**, a number that can be
fractional. This is how fast you can react, particularly in combat. Rounded
down, this score becomes your **Basic Move**, which is how far you run in a
combat turn. Both can be tuned separately, with Basic Move being much cheaper.

Your Basic Move can be reduced if you're carrying too much weight. How much is
too much depends on your Basic Lift.

You might notice that the functions of each attribute are a
little... unbalanced. ST and HT have a few things they do, and are useful to
characters who want to do those things well. DX and IQ are the basis for 95% of
the game's skills and _everyone_ wants to have good levels in those. And this is
why they cost 20 points per level to raise, while ST and HT cost 10.

Finally, **Size Modifier** is a number representing how big you are in relation
to a typical human. The vast majority of delvers are more or less human-sized
and -shaped, and so have a 0 here and don't need to think about it any
further. Monsters, of course, have much more varied scores.

## Other Traits

Each of these gets their own chapter later on, mainly because there are huge
lists of them.

- **Advantages** are special abilities or social edges your character
  possesses. Their chapter lists the stuff anybody might get, but each
  professional template also has access to a few exclusive ones.

- **Disadvantages** are the "problems" mentioned earlier. They inconvenience you
  in several ways but give you more points to spend.

- **Skills** let you do stuff in the game. They have levels relative to their
  associated attribute. As mentioned above, most are based on DX or IQ, though
  some use HT, Perception, or Will. Spells are also skills, available to
  characters with the proper advantages.

- **Quirks** are small foibles or personality traits that are too "light" to
  cause a mechanical impact, but can help flesh out your character. Anyone can
  pick up to 5 quirks, each of which gives you a single extra character point to
  spend. These can be spent on extra traits, or to get extra starting cash to
  buy better equipment.

## Language, Please!

Language gets a bit of boxed text here. While language is an acquired skill in
real life, it's treated as an advantage here.

As is usual in the dungeon fantasy genre, most sapient beings can speak and
write a language called by the very original name of Common. All PCs get this
one for free. Being illiterate in Common is a disadvantage worth -3 points.

Other languages also exist. Most of them feature in ancient grimoires, magical
scrolls, and enigmatic dungeon writings. Certain isolated cultures might also
have their own languages, and their members might be unable or unwilling to
speak Common. Spoken proficiency and literacy in a language cost 3 points each
(i.e, it costs 6 points to know how to speak and write in a language).


## Cosmetic Details

There are some traits that have less mechanical impact and mostly serve to flesh
out your character. Age, ethnicity, handedness, gender, hair and eye color,
height and weight, all of these things are purely cosmetic and do not affect
your stats in any way.

Age being entirely cosmetic is a big departure from core GURPS, which had a
series of advantages and disadvantages about being young or old, as well as
long- or short-lived. None of that costs anything here. As the joke goes, the
lifespan of a delver is measured in months regardless of their biology.

Handedness matters in that you get a penalty for wielding weapons and doing
certain other tasks with your off-hand, but being right- or left-handed is a
purely cosmetic choice. And you can buy the Ambidexterity advantage to ignore it
altogether.

Next up: Professions! I'll need multiple posts to cover this one.
