---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read DFRPG Adventurers: Swashbuckler"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

While everyone else was... doing whatever it is they do, the Swashbuckler
mastered the blade. This is the template for people who like precision, speed
and elegance in their fighting style, but unlike the Martial Artist prefer to
bring an actual sword to a swordfight.

The two templates share some of the same ethics, you could say. They emphasize
the role of skill attained through countless hours of practice, and how that
lets you transcend mortal limits. The Swashbuckler is less mystical about it,
though, and its abilities are not tied to a specific power source or a set of
rituals. After all, some of the most iconic swashbucklers of fiction live a life
filled with booze and partying without losing any of their edge.

## Base Stats

Swashbucklers start out with ST 11, DX 15, IQ 10, HT 13. They don't modify any
secondary stats, but their natural speed is already at 7.

## Advantages

We get quite a bit to start with! **Combat Reflexes**, one level **Enhanced
Parry** with a specific weapon skill, **Luck**, **Weapon Bond**, and **Weapon
Master** (One Weapon).

We already saw a lot of those, and it's notable that the swashbuckler starts out
with Combat Reflexes, Luck, and Weapon Master. Enhanced Parry and Weapon Bond
are easy picks for someone who intends to focus on one specific weapon from the
start, boosting defense rolls and general skill level for a relatively cheap
price.

The table of discretionary advantages lets you choose 60 points worth and has
the usual stat boosts, some social advantages and a lot of combat advantages
oriented towards being really fast. They also let you expand Weapon Master to
"Two Weapons", "All Fencing Weapons", or "All Swords", though you mostly don't
need this unless the GM is really merciless about taking PC weapons away.

## Disadvantages

The Swashbuckler shares a lot of disadvantage choices with the Bard, as the two
often take inspiration from the same sources. Both could fit easily in the
setting of the Three Musketeers or Cyrano de Bergerac.

The main difference here is a set of choices that indicate your Swashbuckler's
motivation for becoming so good with a sword. Do they follow the Gentleman's
Code of Honor and thus are always ready to avenge an insult? Do they have an
obsession with becoming the world's best swordfighter?

Have they taken a personal vow related to how they fight? That last one can be
anything from the relatively harmless "I will only use my weapon of choice" to
the more serious "I will never refuse a challenge to combat" or the nearly
suicidal "I will never wear armor". If you take that last one, be sure to boost
your Parry and Dodge!

## Skills

The offered melee skill packages are all the classic fencer loadouts. You either
wield a single one-handed sword, or you can complement it with an off-hand
dagger, cloak, or shield by spreading your points a little thinner. The sword
will usually be a fencing weapon, but it doesn't have to be.

You could also take the "one sword" package and the Ambidexterity advantage to
wield two of them if your swashbuckler is more Miyamoto Musashi than
D'Artagnan. In any case you also get the Fast-Draw skills for the weapons you
chose.

Your fixed skill list includes basic mobility and unarmed combat, throwing, and
some social and mobility skills. The list of optional skills has the usual
"delver lore" ones and lets you go deeper into mobility or socialization. Or
perhaps you could take a more exotic backup weapon like a whip or lasso.

## Special Swashbuckler Traits

Swashbucklers can improve Basic Speed by four levels over its base value,
instead of just two. They also get access to a bunch of exclusive advantages,
all of which are on their discretionary list.

- **Armor Familiarity** (1 point/level): Fencing skills depend on mobility, and
  take penalties to attack and parry equal to your encumbrance level. Each level
  of this advantage lets you ignore one level of that penalty.

- **Daredevil** (15 points): When you take a _real_ and _unecessary_ risk, you
  get a +1 to all success rolls, and may reroll critical failures, taking the
  second result instead. This is a mixed blessing, because it also incentivizes
  you to take those stupid risks for the bonus. The example in the book is
  calling out a challenge to the sleeping dragon instead of sneaking around
  it. Can't parry a fire breath!

- **Enhanced Time Sense** (45 points): You're so fast you can see the world in
  bullet time. You always go before everyone else in combat, and you're too fast
  to trigger delayed actions from people who don't have this trait. If someone
  else in the fight has this trait, you figure out initiative order amongst
  yourselves, but you still act before everyone who doesn't have the trait.

  This is an upgrade to Combat Reflexes, and includes its benefits. You pay only
  the 30-point difference to get it if you already have Combat Reflexes.

- **Every One's a Critical** (15 points): You have an expanded critical range
  for your attack rolls, and if you don't like the result rolled on the critical
  hits table you can reroll it and take the second result.

- **Great Void** (10 points): When you retreat in combat, you can step an extra
  yard away from your foe. The defense bonus for retreating remains the same,
  but you can cover more ground.

- **Rapier Wit** (5 points): This works exactly like the Bard's Song of
  Humiliation, but it's not magic and you don't need to sing. You can use the
  highest of Intimidation or IQ for it, instead of Singing.

- **Springing Attack** (10 points): If you can Concentrate for a turn to brace
  yourself, your next attack will do more damage, and you can spend 1 FP to take
  an extra step during the attack, either advancing 2 yards or stepping forward
  and then retreating.

## Customization

Swashbucklers are all about being very good with one weapon or a pair of related
weapons. Therefore, weapon choice is probably one of your most important
decisions when making one. It's sure to be a sword, and for a lot of characters
it's going to be a fencing weapon. Those are super expensive, so you want to use
your quirk points to get the best sword you can.

Armor is usually a secondary consideration, as you don't want to get too much
and suffer encumbrance penalties when fighting. That concern goes away if you
happen to take a non-fencing sword or if you get Armor Familiarity.

Speaking of that, your possible choice of advantages is extremely broad. A lot
of them are about fighting better, but you're already so good to start with you
could instead branch into being the party's backup socialite. And even if you
take lots of combat powers, you still get the choice between favoring defense or
offense.
