---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read DFRPG Adventurers: Scout"
tags:
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
    - lets-read
---

The Scout resembles the D&D Ranger, but not just any ranger. It's specifically
the D&D 4th Edition Archer Ranger. This profession has nothing to do with magic,
but is very skilled at sneaking, tracking, and surviving in the wild. And they
love to reach out over great distances and touch people's hearts (with arrows).

This is ultimately a very simple template, but it also does its job extremely
well, and it's likely to be your main point of engagement with the DFRPG's
ranged combat rules.

## Base Stats

Scouts start out with ST 11, DX 14, IQ 11, HT 12. Their Perception is increased
all the way to 14, and their Basic Speed to 7.

## Advantages

All Scouts have **Heroic Archer** and two levels of **Outdoorsman**. The former
cements them as the profession most focused on ranged combat, as it makes their
archery attacks much more accurate and lets them shoot more often. The second is
the same Talent the Barbarian gets, and boosts outdoorsy survival skills.

They have a further 40 points to distribute among the usual stat boosts and
combat-enhancing advantages, many of which are focused on ranged combat. Among
then is Weapon Master (Bow), which further enhances their damage and rate of
fire with bows.

## Disadvantages

The Scout's disadvantages mostly involve traits that make them antisocial
loners, though a subset here makes them devoted guardians of the wild
instead. None are mandatory - build your own dysfunctional personality.

## Skills

Scout melee skill packages give you an option to use a sword or a spear with or
without a shield, or a staff. Very Robin-Hoody. Your ranged combat skill, which
is the one you're using most of the time, is Bow at a starting level of 18.

A lot of the mobility and perception skills that are optional for everyone else
are part of the basic Scout package. Unarmed combat gets moved to the optional
section, which also contains a bunch of niche exploration skills no one else
gets, except perhaps for the Barbarian.

## Special Scout Traits

Scouts can raise their Perception to 25, and their Basic Move by up to 6 above
its base value. They also get access to these special advantages listed
below. Like the Knight's special traits, these aren't magic: the Scout is just
that good.

- **Heroic Archer** (20 points): A normal archer can shoot one arrow every three
  seconds or so, if they don't stop to aim. An Heroic one can shoot every turn
  if they make the skill rolls listed in this advantage's description, and those
  rolls are much easier for Heroic Archers who are also Weapon Masters of the
  bow. They also get the benefits of aiming for a turn without having to do so,
  and can ignore penalties from crazy positions or acrobatics while shooting.

  This is so necessary for being a badass archer in GURPS that every Scout gets
  it automatically.

- **Multi-Aim** (6 points/level): Every level lets you aim at an extra target
  simultaneously, both for the purposes of gaining accuracy bonuses and for
  setting up "overwatch" with Wait maneuvers.

- **Silence** (5 points/level): You can move and breathe noiselessly. Each level
  gives +1 to stealth while moving, and +2 while standing still.

- **Strongbow** (1 point): Every bow has a "rated ST" - you need to be at least
  that strong to use it, but you don't get benefits from being any
  stronger. This perk raises your ST by up to 2 for the purposes of shooting
  bows, letting you use "stronger" weapons and deal more damage than your muscle
  mass would indicate. It does stack with other similar enhancements - for
  example, if you have ST 11 plus this perk and an elven bow, you shoot as if
  your ST was 15.

- **Telescopic Vision** (5 points/level): You can "zoom in" with your naked
  eyes! Each level increase magnification, helping observe distant targets and
  also shoot them.

## Customization

The book offers three sample skill and disadvantage sets here: a _bounty hunter_
loads up on antisocial disads, tracking skills, and even a bit more melee
prowess because not every hunt ends with a bow shot. A _ranger_ has Combat
Reflexes and focuses heavily on the ability to travel and protect the
wilderness. And the _sharpshooter_ is an assassin who min-maxes their shooting
capabilities.

Note that there is no "dual-wielding ranger" build here - that's very much a
D&D-ism you can blame squarely on Drizz't. The Scout is first and foremost an
archer. The wilderness-focused melee specialist is the Barbarian.
