---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Dungeon Fantasy: Professions!"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - lets-read
---

"Core GURPS" has entirely free-form, point-based character creation, but we do
things a little differently in Dungeon Fantasy. The first step to creating a
character is picking a **profession**, which is more or less the equivalent of a
class in D&D.

The chapter begins with a list of the available professions in this book:

- **Barbarians** are strong "heavy" warriors skilled at outdoor survival.

- **Bards** are the most "social" delvers, and complement their mundane social
  skills with mind-affecting songs and magic.

- **Clerics** can use divine magic to heal and bless, and can exorcise spirits
  and curses.

- **Druids** use nature magic to affect plants, animals, and the weather, and
  can also brew herbal concoctions.

- **Holy Warriors** specialize in fighting Evil monsters with skill at arms and
  divine powers.

- **Knights** are armored and exceptionally skilled "heavy" warriors trained in
  personal and group tactics.

- **Martial Artists** cultivate inner power to fight and perform impossible
  feats.

- **Scouts** are skilled survivalists and master archers.

- **Swashbucklers** are daring skirmishers as fast as a Knight is strong.

- **Thieves** open locks, disarm traps, stab backs, and get into places they
  shouldn't.

- **Wizards** are masters of weird lore, and have access to many many spells.

A lot of these are familiar to people coming from D&D, and the individual
articles about each will explain the differences.

## Anatomy of a Professional Template

In this section we'll go over how templates are described, and mention some
things that are true for all of them.

We always start with a general description of the profession, and then jump into
the numbers.

### Basic Stats

The starting stat line for the template. I'll mention the values of the
attributes and if any secondary characteristics are modified from that baseline.

_None_ of the templates have stats below 10, the human average. Adventuring is a
dangerous profession and adventurers need to be very good at what they do. While
you should still let the wizard decipher magic formulae and the barbarian lift
heavy things, the wizard is not weak and the barbarian is not stupid. For the
same reason, Perception and Will cannot be lowered by more than 4 levels (and
you shouldn't lower it at all if your IQ is 10 to begin with, in my opinion).

Basic Speed is the stat that's tweaked the most often, for min-maxing
reasons. Professions that are meant to be particularly quick on the uptake have
it at 7, others have it at 6, and if the natural calculation ends up at a
fracional number it's adjusted up or down to the appropriate level. Don't lower
it below 6, or you'll have a hard time in combat.

Characters of all professions can raise their stats up to 20, using either
discretionary points at character creation or points earned in play. Will and
Perception also have a maximum of 20, if raised separately from IQ.

All professions can also raise HP and FP by an extra 1/3 above their base
score. For example, a character with ST 15 could buy 5 extra HP for a total of
20.

Each profession also has improved limits for the stats that make up their core
competency, which we'll see as we review each one.


### Advantages

Every profession has a small set of advantages that are core to it and always
present. They also have a set of discretionary advantages to choose from, with a
budget limit detailed in the template.

These discretionary advantages always include a set choices that amount to
improved basic or secondary stats, and the first two levels of Luck. You can
activate your Luck when you roll a test and don't like the result. You then
reroll it three times and pick the best result among those. The more levels you
have, the more often you can do this in a session. As you might imagine, it's
important to every adventurer who wants to survive a long time!

The other discretionary advantages are specific to your profession and can take
you into one of several different directions within its definition. Kinda like
D&D subclasses, but you end up assembling your starting class features.

An advantage type that turns up quite often is the Talent. A Talent is a leveled
advantage that adds its level to a specific set of skills, and usually gives
another small boost related to its theme. This also includes what I call "Power
Talents", which enhance spells and rolls you use for certain powers, in addition
to letting you learn those in the first place.

### Disadvantages

The default scheme here is the same. Every profession has one or more
stereotypical disadvantages that are always chosen, and then you pick more from
a discretionary set until you hit the limit of -50 points. Reduced stats do
count towards the limit, so if a professional template has those, it will have
less miscellaneous problems.

Discretionary disadvantages can also lead your character to a different kind of
stereotype. Is your cleric an intolerant inquisitor, or a compassionate martyr?
However, they're also fuzzier. If you don't like the stereotypical choices
presented here, you are free to choose from any other disadvantage in the book
as long as their total value doesn't go over the limit. Want to have a
chivalrous thief? Go right ahead!

### Skills

This is divided into three subsections. The first one is for your character's
main weapon skills, and lets you chose between two or three "packages"
representing the most iconic equipment for the profession.

Next you have a list of primary skills related to your character's core
competency. Barbarians and scouts are good at outdoor survival, for example,
thieves are sneaky, and clerics have to know all about their religion and its
enemies. New characters always have all the skills from this list.

And next you have a list of optional secondary skills. All templates have 7
points to spend here, 1 per skill. These are usually the sort of thing every
delver learns to do at least a bit, like stealth, first aid, communicating via
gestures, tying good knots, and so on. They also include things related to the
template's profession, but which are a bit more niche.

### Spells

This last section is a bit fuzzier, as spells get a whole book all to
themselves. Instead of having a definite list, this usually defines which spells
you can learn, how many of them you start with, and what's your starting skill
level when you spent a single point on a spell. This closes out the template
proper.

### Special Professional Traits

This is where those increased stat limits are listed, and also where you find
advantages and powers exclusive to that profession. These are also listed in the
template under Advantages or Skills - here is where you find their detailed
descriptions.

Stuff that's available to everyone is described in other chapters.

### Customization Notes

This is where you get some tips as to what you pick depending on how you imagine
your character. For spellcasters, this is also where you find example spell
loadouts.

This is also more or less where you'd start picking your **Quirks**. They're not
listed on the templates, but each character can choose up to five. These are
little foibles and personality traits that don't have any mechanical impact, but
can help fleshing out your character's personality. Each gives you an extra
point to spend on stuff from your template, too!

Many characters might want to instead spend their quirk points on extra starting
money - each point spent this way gives you extra money equal to half your
starting amount (which varies depending on your Wealth). This helps you start
out with decent armor and other bits of expensive but important gear.

## Text Box: Team-Building

This is some useful advice for making a Dungeon Fantasy adventuring
party. Players should consult both with each other and with the GM when picking
their templates. The typical campaign throws diverse challenges at the players,
and these demand a diverse party. A group needs enough fighty types to survive,
with a mix of ranged and melee attacks. They also need enough specialized
problem-solvers like thieves and spellcasters to handle any weirder challenges
that might pop up.

That being said, the GM should advise the players about what types of challenge
they can expect in the campaign, and which professions are more or less likely
to be useful. A campaign that's all about trekking through the wilderness will
benefit more from barbarians, scouts and druids than from bards, thieves and
knights. A campaign that takes place mostly in cities and underground ruins will
be the reverse.

## Text Box: Membership Hath Privileges

This box discusses why Dungeon Fantasy uses templates. It guarantees that each
character has something unique to offer, makes essential adventuring
capabilities harder to overlook, and lets each player focus on one "niche" and
get good enough at it to tackle the game's challenges.

That's also why every template has some built-in niche protection. For example,
only clerics can cast healing spells, and while everyone can fight in melee the
Knight is the best at it.

That said, every trait does have a point cost, and the GM can allow any PC to
buy it if it suits the campaign. While that might make the niches a bit fuzzier,
it can also be a good way to cover for a "missing" template. At the most extreme
end, you could just hand a point budget to your players and let them make
whatever they want. In that case, the only thing you need to keep in mind are
the pre-requisite traits for the various spell types.

Any character can raise their basic stats to a maximum of 20 with earned points,
and buy extra HP or Fatigue up to 1/3 of their ST or HT stat respectively. Each
template has better limits for certain traits, and we'll look at those in the
template descriptions.

I'll add that the templates make character creation _much_ faster than the
free-form method, so even if you're not using them as written it might be a good
idea to start from a template and then change it to suit your tastes.

## Coming up Next

A look at our first professional template: The Barbarian.
