---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read DFRPG Adventurers: Wizard"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

The descriptive text on the book paints a picture of the wizard as someone who's
very smug about being smart and about wielding magic that doesn't rely on fickle
supernatural entities. So at least on the fiction front, it's business as usual.

They do have plenty to be smug about, though this isn't _exactly_ the same set
of things that makes D&D Wizards smug. There are many situations that can only
be solved with a wizard's help, and their spell list includes everything that's
not specifically part of the cleric's or druid's central niches. But don't
expect them to instantly end fights in one turn with a snap of their
fingers. The Knight and Barbarian will have already won the battle by the time
that fireball is ready. The wise wizard keeps an open mind regarding their spell
selection, and plans their explosions in advance.

Wizards become delvers more to find buried arcane secrets than to find money
(though the later always helps). Because of this, they're often the delvers with
the best training to identify and handle those secrets.

## Basic Stats

Wizards start with ST 10, DX 12, IQ 15, and HT 11. Their Perception is lowered
to 12 and their Speed bumped to 6.

This is the highest starting IQ of all professions, and the most specialized
"caster" stat block we'll see here.

## Advantages

Wizards start with three points of **Energy Reserve (Magical)** and **Magery
3**. Magery is their "power talent", and unlike most of the others doesn't have
a separate pre-requisite advantage because it has a "level 0" that acts in that
function as well. Magery 0 is enough to learn most spells and lets you detect
nearby sources of magic, but doesn't add any bonuses to spells like subsequent
levels do.

Energy Reserve acts as a "parallel" pool of Fatigue Points that can only be used
to power spells and arcane powers. It costs the same as Fatigue, and the main
advantage is that it recovers concurrently with Fatigue. The other casters all
have it as part of their optional advantages, but it's factory-standard for
wizards. It fits their theme to have vast reserves of magical power but to get
winded easily from physical exertion...

Discretionary advantages include mental stat boosts, more Magery or ER, stuff
that makes you smarter than your IQ indicates (like Intuition and Language
Talent) and stuff that makes you more magical (like Spirit Empathy or some
custom traits we'll see below).

## Disadvantages

That Per reduction takes up some of our disadvantage budget, so we only need to
pick -35 points of further problems. Part of these make you less physically
strong, a few others make your nerve break easily in combat, and a bunch make
you into different flavors of eccentric genius. Are you an absent-minded
professor with a heart of gold, or a fantasy mad scientist?

Of note here is **Weirdness Magnet**, which gives the GM carte blanche to come
up with _extra weird_ things during adventures that feel inexplicably drawn to
you and generally make your life harder. If you need -15 points to reach your
limit, take that and have fun!

## Skills

Wizard melee weapon packages are the classic "staff" and the somewhat novel
"wand and shield", which is such a good idea I have to wonder about the
curricula of these magic schools from other books. Wands in this game are a
little heftier too, and can be used as light sticks with the Smallsword skill.

For ranged combat, they can choose to go old-school and throw darts, wield a
sling, or learn Innate Attack, which is what you use to aim missile spells. Most
wizards who have those spells will want the latter.

Their primary skills are all about lore. They can teach, compose well-written
texts, speed read, make proper use of research libraries, work with alchemy,
dispose of magical hazardous material and recall all sorts of knowledge about a
variety of magic-related subjects. Their optional secondary skills include the
usual delver basics and also further intellectual pursuits, including
Cartography for drawing those dungeon maps on the go.

## Spells

You get to choose 30 different spells here, with a point spent in each.

Wizards have access to nearly all of the full glory of the classic GURPS magic
system. If you compare their spell list with the one present in the Magic
supplement for core GURPS, you'll see a few omissions. These are mostly stuff
that the authors of Dungeon Fantasy thought didn't fit with their intended
flavor: Enchantment spells because magic items should be found as loot, and
most teleportation because having casual access to that lets you skip too much
of the game. And obviously, anything that's part of the cleric's and druid's
core niches is exclusive to those professions.

We're also back to dealing with prerequisite spells here. Spells are divided
into Colleges, and each College has a prerequisite tree that's a cross between a
college curriculum and a skill tree from a game like Path of Exile or Diablo. If
you want to learn Fireball, for example, you must know Create Fire and Shape
Fire. The more complex and powerful a spell is, the more prerequisites it has.

Bards have to deal with this too, but they only have access to a limited set of
colleges. Wizards obviously have access to all of wizardly magic.

## Special Wizard Traits


This is where you get the official description of **Magery**, which I gave you
above. This is why you even play a wizard in the first place, but they do have a
few other special tricks available to them.

- **Gizmos** (5 points/level): Like the thief version, but for wizard-themed
  minor gadgets instead of thief-themed ones.

- **Improved Magic Resistance** (5 points/level): Like the base Magic Resistance
  advantage available to everyone, this penalizes any spell cast on you. Unlike
  the base version, though, it doesn't interfere with your own spells.

- **Wild Magic** (21 points/level): Once per session per level of this trait,
  you can cast _any_ wizardly spell as if you knew it at a level equal to IQ +
  Magery. If you succeed, have a point to spare, and already know the spell
  prerequisites, you can also permanently learn it then and there, though you'll
  get a small penalty to cast it for the next month as you get used to it.

## Customization

It's all about spell selection! There are so many to choose from the sample
builds mention whole colleges instead of individual spells. Artillery mages with
area damaging spells, controllers with a large collection of save-or-suck
effects, or thaumathologists that specialize in meta-spells and magic knowledge
skills.

Every mage wants extra Energy Reserves, and those quirk points can be used
either for an expensive and high-capacity Power Item, or for more spells.
