---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read DFRPG Adventurers: Thief"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

Dungeon Fantasy thieves are much closer to the D&D Thief of editions past than
to the more modern D&D Rogue. Their main job is not to fight monsters, but to
help the party get past all the non-monster things that stand between them and
the treasure. Locks, traps, deranged obstacle courses, you name it. Thus, they
shine before and after fights, but not during them.

You _can_ take them in a fightier direction if you want, including by getting
something that sounds a lot like the classic Backstab ability, but if your main
desire is to deftly weave through a fight while stabbing enemies in sensitive
spots, you want a swashbuckler.

That said, in games that allow "multiclassing" the Thief does have an easier
time becoming a swashbuckler than almost everyone else.

## Stats

Thieves start out with ST 11, DX 15, IQ 13, HT 11. They bump their Perception to
14, decrease their Speed from 6.5 to 6, and increase their Move to 7.

The four stats are pretty similar to the Martial Artist's and the
Swashbuckler's, but emphasize IQ more since this is our official skill monkey.

## Advantages

All thieves start out with **Flexibility**, **High Manual Dexterity**, and
**Perfect Balance**, all of which are excellent boosts to anything involving
tricky movement and most physically-oriented "thief skills".

They get 30 extra points for discretionary advantages, and their selection is
actually a bit low on stat boosts: just DX and IQ instead of all four, and just
Per, Basic Speed, and Basic Move instead of all secondaries. The rest of the
choices are all stuff that offers further specialized bonuses to the same areas
enhanced by the standard advantages. Thieves are one of the only professions
that can start out with above-average Wealth, which gives them extra starting
money and helps with selling loot in town. And they can pick Weapon Master
(Knives) if they want to go in a fightier direction.

## Disadvantages

The thief's mandatory disadvantage is one of **Greed**, **Kleptomania** or
**Trickster**, explaining why they chose the profession in the first
place. Discretionary choices can make them either someone who needs money _fast_
and _constantly_ to fuel a gambling or partying addiction, or someone whose
anti-social personality and criminal record has locked out of getting legitimate
jobs.


## Skills

A thief's melee weapon skill choices are the same as the swashbuckler's, though
their skill level will be a comparatively paltry 15 or 14 and they lack most
melee support abilities. The most recommended option here seems to be "weapon
and shield", instead of the swashbuckler's single blade. You're not a god of
parrying, so having a shield or cloak in your off hand is a big help.

You do get a _lot_ of mundane non-combat skills. All that sneaking and
exploration stuff that's secondary and optional for everyone else is part of
your starting spread, at much better levels. You're particularly good at the
stuff that maps to D&D's traditional thief skills: stealth, climbing,
lockpicking, trap detection and disarming, etc. Also acrobatics and escaping
from bonds.

Your secondary skill choices are mostly more "niche" areas of spying and crime
like forgery, poisons and lip-reading, and also include a selection of social
skills.

## Special Thief Traits

You get no enhanced advancement limits, but you do get a lot of exclusive
mundane skills and a few special traits:

- **Catfall** (10 points): you suffer much less damage from falls.

- **Expert Backstabbing** (2 points/level): Adds its level (which has no cap) to
  your ST for _melee_ attacks that allow _no_ active defense because the victim
  couldn't see you coming. That means you start your turn behind them, or are
  invisible, or you're in a social situation where they didn't expect you to
  attack. This is much closer to the restrictions placed on the AD&D thief's
  backstabs than the conditions for getting combat advantage in modern D&D. You
  need to put in the work to get one of these maybe once per fight, but the
  extra damage will be worth it.

- **Gizmos** (5 points/each): Each Gizmo lets you pull one small item out of
  thin air per session. This can be either something you have on your sheet but
  didn't specify you were carrying, or an item you _didn't_ have subject to
  certain price limits (which are more generous if the thing is
  thief-themed). This isn't magic, it's advance planning combined with a little
  bit of cinematic trickery.

- **High Manual Dexterity** (5 points/level): This is a Talent that gives
  bonuses to a bunch of common DX-based thief tasks.

- **Sensitive Touch** (10 points): Gives a large bonus to perception rolls
  involving mainly your sense of touch, and to rolls where being good at
  "working by feel" is an advantage, like searching bodies, lockpicking and
  disarming some traps.

- **Silence** (5 points/level): Like the Scout ability.

## Customization

The book recommends three example skill and advantage selections that can take a
generic thief and turn them into a sneaky _burglar_, a stabby _assassin_, or a
smart and silver-tongued _mastermind_.

Generally speaking, it's all about your mundane skills here. Unlike in D&D,
thieves _never_ stop being relevant, even when there are utility spellcasters in
the party. Utility spells usually don't let you skip skill rolls
entirely. Therefore, those casters won't be casting spells on themselves to make
the thief obsolete - they will casting spells _on the thief_ to make them even
better at their job.

Your thief's quirk points should be spent on more skills! There's some sweet
high-tier thief gear out there but it's outside a starting character's price
range.
