---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read DFRPG Adventurers: Chapter 3, Races"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

Yes, this book still uses the term "Races", having been written a few years
before other games finally started getting rid of it. That brings a symptom of
the main problem I have with this chapter: the options presented here mostly
follow the cliches presented in older editions of D&D. I imagine they chose this
because it provided a good and familiar baseline in 2016-2017, but it does mean
we have to deal with some of the annoying fantasy racism that later games made
an effort to remove. The text actually does acknowledge some of that racism,
though this is kinda disguised in the general tongue-in-cheek tone in which the
super generic implied setting is presented.

You see, many social traits in GURPS like Appearance and Social Stigma are
relative. _Who_ thinks the bard is hot, and _who_ looks down on the barbarian's
foreign ways? When a GURPS GM builds a campaign setting from scratch, they're
asked to answer that question by providing a **reference culture**. That's the
dominant culture in the areas where the vast majority of the campaign takes
place.

This chapter does not describe this concept, but it does introduce us to a
reference culture by repeatedly referencing it in the text and template
descriptions: that of Ordinary Townsfolk(TM).

Ordinary Townsfolk are those people who live in Town under the rule of the
King. They're human, they very rarely leave Town, and they don't have good
opinions about things outside of their daily experience. That paints a picture
that's almost the opposite of "open-minded" and "cosmopolitan". Ordinary
Townsfolk recognize adventuring as a profession, but not a very respectable
one. I guess that's in part because delvers will accept "just about anyone", as
PCs are not affected by Social Stigmas. Still, they're happy to sell stuff to
adventurers, who always have plenty of money to spend.

The very first sentence in the actual text of the chapter does state that "race"
means "species", so let's use that term from now on in this post. It goes on to
say that many nonhuman intelligent species can be found in the world. A lot of
them show up as the opposition, inhabiting dungeons and other dangerous places:
orcs, ogres, trolls, and so on. Ordinary Townsfolk consider those
monsters. There are other species they consider "people", and whom monsters
consider enemies. These you can find living in Town, and available as options
for delver PCs.

Next, the chapter introduces the concept of **racial templates** (henceforth
**species templates**), which work a bit differently than the professional ones.

Each template has a fixed cost, which must be paid using the discretionary
points from your delver's professional template. Every professional template, as
we already saw, has a listed amount for buying advantages and powers. They also
have 7 points for secondary skills, and can gain an extra 5 from quirks. This is
how much you can spend on a species template, which does mean you'll be spending
less points on stuff related to your profession. Someone without a species
template is assumed to be (mostly) human.

The cost of a template is the total cost of all of its components.

## Template Components

Every species template has stat modifiers, advantages, disadvantages, and might
have features. The stat modifiers apply after you've adjusted your PC's stats
from their professional template, and modify both the current score and the
usual maximums. For example, if you have ST+2, you can also buy your ST up to 22
and not just 20.

Advantages and disadvantages are shared by all members of that species, whether
because they're part of its biology, because they're part of its dominant
culture or because they model the prejudices of Ordinary Townsfolk. Features are
cosmetic details that don't cost any points. That's my second problem with his
chapter, and it flows right from the first.

I'm not really a fan of having "cultural" or personality traits be a mandatory
part of a species template. As I mentioned in [this old post of mine][1], I
don't want a bigoted asshole who says "all dwarves are greedy, hard-headed
bastards" to be _right_. Plus players just love playing exceptional or
rebellious members of a species that don't conform to the cliche, and I'd like
that to be easy. The templates I tend to write for my own campaigns tend to be
far more minimalist than these, without most attribute adjustments and with no
mandatory mental traits.

You write the components of your species template down in the appropriate
sections, together with the ones from your profession, which I think it's a big
improvement over the way core GURPS does it ("just write the template and its
total cost with your Advantages and remember its components with your brain").

## PC Species

These are our species templates. All of them cost 20 points except for Cat-Folk,
which cost 40. As mentioned above, most of their descriptions are well-trod and
sometimes unfortunate cliches, so please note that I'm paraphrasing the book
here and not stating my own opinion (which you can find way up there in the
introductory paragraphs).

Anyway, here are the species:

**Cat-Folk** refer to themselves as cat-boys or cat-girls depending on
gender. They have human-shaped bodies covered in short fur, feline features, and
prominent cat ears and tail. That gives us a look closer to that of the Khajit
from Elder Scrolls than to the Mi'quote from Final Fantasy 14.

Their claws and teeth are effective, they can see really well in the dark, they
have Catfall, and a bit of Temperature Tolerance from fur. Their disadvantages
are also cliche cat traits: impulsive, lazy, and with a mild phobia about
entering water.

They're compatible with human armor (the tail can be safely tucked in), and they
can buy gauntlets and boots that expose their claws but still protect their
hands and feet at no extra cost.

**Dwarves** are pretty much what you'd expect. Short, sturdy, really good at
mining and at killing people with axes, excellent night vision. Also greedy and
stubborn.

**Elves** represent "green" or "wood" elves with a hands-on approach to
defending nature. They're far more approachable than Those Other Elves, which
are haughty, isolationist, and not statted up for PC use. Elves are a bit taller
than humans, have the classical pointy ears, and these wood elves have bright
green hair. Nothing unexpected in their traits here: they're fast, pretty, have
innate Magery, are good at sneaking and shooting bows, and have a sense of duty
to Nature.

**Half-Elves** inherit elven grace, magical aptitude, and bright hair colors,
but are a bit more robust thanks to their human parents. They have no duty to
Nature, but suffer under the cliche where neither humans nor elves like them
very much.

**Gnomes** tend to follow the "tinker gnome" archetype in that they're very good
at mechanical skills in addition to being almost as sturdy and cave-adapted as
dwarves. They're also extremely curious, and are our first "small" species at SM
-1.

A bit of lore: there are rumors of "Hell Gnomes", a tribe that went bad. Other
Gnomes claim this term refers to actual demons, but don't seem comfortable with
the topic. I had something similar back when I GMed, a gnome cult who went
around doing evil stuff and saying "Rawr, I'm a monster!".

**Half-Ogre**: The progeny of an ogre and an orc or human, half-ogres are
smaller than their ogre parents and able to live in society. They're _very_
strong, tough, and fearless, but have an IQ penalty, are considered ugly, and
bear a social stigma as "savages" due to their parentage.

**Half-Orcs**: You can't talk about half-orcs without talking about orcs, and
the orcs in this game are subject to all of the old cliches. There's a group of
related species known as "Goblin-kin" whom Ordinary Townsfolk view as savage
brutes, and who discriminate among themselves on the basis of size and blood
purity. Orcs are a part of this group: the medium-sized, not-too-stupid ones who
bully the others.

Half-orcs are "the product of generations of inbreeding among the offspring of
orc rapine". Yikes! While that's not as bad as the 3e situation (where people
thought every half-orc was the direct product of rape), it still didn't
completely remove that from their backstory. This is why it's a good idea to
modify or discard the implied setting.

Anyway, half-orcs are as smart as humans but tougher, with better hearing and
night vision. Some half-orcs are accepted by orcs and can be found among
them. The ones who are rejected drift towards human settlements, where they
suffer the same prejudices as half-ogres and often can only make a living as
delvers.

**Halflings** are so called because they have half the height of a human. This
makes them tiny (SM -2) and weak compared to a human, but they're very agile and
very sneaky, in addition to being crack shots with a bow or sling. They're also
universally gluttonous and kleptomaniac. Unlike kender from Dragonlance, though,
these halflings know what they're doing when they steal from others. The cliche
halfling community here is not an idyllic pastoral village, but an organized
crime family.

[1]: {{ "/2018/10/18/peoples-of-tamriel.html" | absolute_url }}
