---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Dungeon Fantasy Adventurers: Advantages, Disadvantages, and Skills"
tags:
    - gurps
    - lets-read
---

I'm going to do something non-standard for me and read things out of order
here. We just covered Chapter 1 of the book, but I'm going to skip Chapters 2
and 3 for now to talk about the three chapters that come after them: Advantages,
Disadvantages, and Skills.

I'm doing this because I feel knowing a bit about how these traits work will
help understand the contents of Chapter 2 and 3, which are the real "meat" of
the book as far as this Let's Read is concerned. What I'm _not_ doing is
describing every trait in these chapters in detail. I'll describe their general
workings here, and talk about specific examples when they become relevant in the
templates.

## Advantages

Advantages have fairly straightforward basic mechanics. You pay character points
equal to an advantage's cost and you get the capabilities described in its
text. Some advantages have levels, and those will list a cost per level and
provide increasing benefits.

Generally speaking, most advantages give you bonuses in certain narrow
situations (on tests against fear, for example), or give you capabilities you
can't get in other ways (like a photographic memory, a danger sense, or good
luck). Many of them also give bonuses to Reaction Rolls, and take the place of
the generic Charisma attribute from D&D.

Dungeon Fantasy is by default pretty strict about niche protection in
templates. When spending earned character points to improve your character, you
can buy any advantage listed on their template directly, even if it's not yet on
your sheet. If you want to get something that's not listed there, you and the GM
need to make sure you won't be stepping on anyone's toes.

The list in this chapter is mainly for stuff that could be acquired by any
character. The templates themselves also have mini-lists of exclusive
advantages that cannot be acquired by delvers of other professions.

## Disadvantages

Disadvantages have _negative_ point costs, so they give you more points to spend
elsewhere. For Dungeon Fantasy, the default disadvantage limit is -50. That's
the maximum amount of problems your PC can start with. Lowered secondary
characteristics count against this limit.

Many disadvantages can be "bought off" in play with earned character
points. They can also be acquired in play, usually due to the kind of misfortune
that can befall dungeon delvers. In this case, the disadvantage merely reduces
your point total instead of giving you more points to spend.

I like disadvantages because they're great for defining a character's
personality. Some of them are even considered positive traits in real life, like
Honesty and Selflessness, but are classed as disadvantages because they
constrain the PC's behavior.

Many disadvantages are personality traits that have an attached Self-Control
Number, which you choose when you acquire the trait. They're usually the kind of
trait that compels you to behave in a certain way that can be detrimental to
you, like being Curious, Greedy, or Gullible. When you want to resist their
pull, you can make a success roll against that self control number.

The default is self-control number is 12. You can choose 15 instead and only get
half the listed points for the disadvantage (since it's less severe), or you can
choose 9 or 6 to get more (and then you have to live with the
consequences). Nothing else modifies this number. It doesn't matter what your
Will score is, or how many other mental defenses you have. And of course, you
can always choose to succumb to your disadvantage without rolling, if it would
make for a good roleplaying scene.

The book offers a neat solution for those cases where it isn't clear or
desirable to engage in the behavior implied by the disadvantage: when it comes
into play, it gives you a -1 penalty per -5 points of its cost for whatever it
is you're trying to do. So the player of your typical horny bard isn't forced to
make a pass at every attractive person they meet, but they might occasionally
need to weather a -3 penalty to their actions because they can't avoid being
distracted by that attractiveness.

Finally, we have some disadvantages here that aren't recommended for any
starting character, but were included because they might be acquired in
play. These are things like missing limbs, missing eyes, hearing impairment, and
so on. There are ways to fix them with magic, but you will suffer their effects
until that happens.


## Skills

Advantages and disadvantages get a lot of attention, but skills are just as
important a part of the system's core. Most actions you perform regularly in an
adventure are covered by skills.

Skills have an associated level, which has no upper limit but is usually between
8 and 13 for your typical civilian. A skill level of 8 or 9 represents a hobby
or a sideline, and a level of 12 or 13 probably applies to the skills a person
uses to earn a living. As we mentioned in the [introduction to Adventurers][2],
that +4 modifier for routine tasks ensures a professional with a skill level of
12 will rarely fail to do their job.

Delvers (and some monsters!) tend to have lots of skills at high levels. Our
templates are usually calibrated to have their main skills at around a level of
16-20, several secondary ones at the 13-14 mark, and a few minor background
skills at 9-10.

A skill of 16 means you almost never fail under pressure, though any extra
penalties that might apply for difficult tasks will reduce your chances. After
16 your basic chance of success stops increasing, since rolls of 17 or 18 are
always failures - but you get better and better at absorbing those extra
penalties.

Each skill has a controlling attribute, which is either DX or IQ for 95% of
them, and might be HT, Perception, or Will for the remainder. The skill's level
is always relative to that controlling attribute. If an attribute goes up, so
does every skill associated with it.

Skills also have a difficulty, which determines what their starting level is
when you spend your first point in them. It can be one of Easy, Average, Hard,
and Very Hard. The point cost progression is the same, but the different
starting positions mean you need to spend more on harder skills to get the same
level.

Skills also have defaults, which are the numbers you roll against when you have
no training in a skill. It's always a much worse number than the one you'd get
with even a point in the skill, and the harder the skill is, the worse its
default. Really complicated skills might not have a default at all, and cannot
be attempted without training.

Some skills might have additional pre-requisites. The most common of those are
spells, which can only be learned and used by someone with the appropriate
magical aptitude advantages.

### Active Defenses

These get their own entry because they're a little special. They're a big part
of a character's ability to survive combat, and might be more important than
HP. We'll likely get into more detail about combat rules when we look at them in
the Exploits book, but here's a preview so you can understand how defenses work.

When someone attacks in combat, they make a success roll against the relevant
weapon skill (plus modifiers). If they succeed, they threaten a hit, and the
target must do something to avoid that. A target who is completely unaware of
the attack or otherwise helpless has no choice but to get hit and take
damage. Everyone else gets the chance to make an active defense roll.

There are three possible defenses: you can **Parry** with your melee weapon or
hands, you can **Block** with a shield, or you can **Dodge**. Parries are based
on your own weapon skill, and can handle most melee attacks. Blocks are based on
the Shield skill and can stop ranged attacks as well, but obviously require a
shield. Dodging is good against everything and can be done multiple times in a
turn without penalty, but it's going to have a smaller score than the others
because it's based on your Basic Speed and penalized by your encumbrance.

Succeeding at your defense roll means you completely avoid the attack! This is
not a contest - simple success is enough to protect you. This means anyone with
defenses of 11 or higher due to high skill or specialized advantages is very
annoying to fight. There are also several strategies attackers can adopt to try
to reduce or nullify an opponent's defense score, but we'll get to them when we
get to them.

[2]: {{ "/xxxx/xx/xx/dfrpf-adventurers-introduction.md" | relative_url }}
