---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Dungeon Fantasy Adventurers: Cleric"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - gurps
---

Dungeon Fantasy Clerics are described as "mortal agents of the Powers of Good",
though the exact nature of those powers is, as mentioned previously, left as an
exercise for the GM. This does match the original D&D description pretty
closely, but the mechanics here are a bit different. DFRPG clerics are much
better spellcasters than they are frontline fighters, though they have an easier
time "multiclassing" into Holy Warrior than anyone else. If divine-powered
frontline fighting is your thing, though, you should play a Holy Warrior
instead.


## Basic Stats

Clerics start out with ST 12, DX 12, IQ 14, and HT 12. This is pretty good and
could be taken in several directions with earned points, though it still leans
in the castery direction.

## Advantages

All clerics have Clerical Investment and Power Investiture 3. The former makes
the character count as a properly ordained priest. This gives a positive
reaction bonus to people who share their religion, lets them perform exorcisms
without penalty and is a pre-requisite for Power Investiture, their spellcasting
talent. It's quite possible your players will care more about the latter two in
a Dungeon Fantasy game.

Power Investiture does for clerics what Magery does for wizards: it lets them
cast spells and acts as a bonus to their skill level with those spells. We'll
talk about that below.

In addition to these advantages, we get 45 points to distribute among a set of
choices. Aside from the usual enhanced attributes and Luck entries, we get a set
of castery advantages like extra Investiture and an Energy Reserve. We can also
choose to be Fearless or Unfazeable, Resistant to Disease, and have Spirit
Empathy.

But that's not all! We can also choose to spend these points on Holy abilities,
which we'll see below.

## Disadvantages

Clerics must choose a specific -10 point disadvantage from among Honesty, a
Sense of Duty to all correligionists, or a Vow to never use edged weapons. It's
part of the "divine power" package, and represents the core vows the cleric has
made to access them.

The rest of these disadvantages are mostly split between "compassionate holy
man" and "intolerant inquisitor" personality traits, with a side order of extra
vows and ritual behavior that can work with either.

## Skills

For weapon skills, can pick the traditional "mace and shield" package, or follow
Friar Tuck's example and just take Staff. Your one-handed weapon could also be
an axe, flail, or sword too - you don't have to imitate D&D on this particular
detail.

All clerics know the basic skills required of their trade, like Religious
Ritual, Public Speaking, Theology, and a few others. They also know how to
diagnose health problems and apply first aid, and a bit of lore about one type
of traditional foe (demons, spirits, or undead). Optional skills include all the
standard Adventurer stuff, plus some things like Research for the religious
scholars and Panhandling for the mendicants.

## Spells

Clerics start with 20 spells from the clerical spellcasting list, picked by the
player, with 1 point spent on each. More on how that works below.

## Special Cleric Traits

Clerics can raise their Will all the to 25 instead of just 20. Clerical
Investment is described in this section too, along with two esoteric skills that
require it:

- **Esoteric Medicine (Holy)**: A hard skill to learn, but it can replace
  mundane First Aid and Surgery in places with any level of sanctity above
  "none"

- **Exorcism**: Rituals for cleansing cursed areas and treating posession
  victims.


The bulk of our special traits are supernatural powers, though. Cleric powers
fall into two categories, both of which are granted by one or more patron
deities. The powers of _Holy Might_ come from the "divine within" and cost no
Fatigue to use. _Clerical Spellcasting_ draws from the surrounding sanctity, and
does cost Fatigue.

The cleric's Power Investiture acts as the "power talent" for both of them. The
character needs at least one level in this talent to buy the related abilities.

### Clerical Spellcasting

The cleric's spell list is smaller than the wizard's, but also much
simpler. The only prerequisite for learning a given spell is a minimum level of
Power Investiture.

Another advantage clerical spellcasting has over the wizardly variety is
exclusive access to types of magic - most notably healing spells.

Cleric spells cost FP as normal, but depend on _ambient sanctity_ instead of
mana. Sanctity is a measure of how much influence the cleric's deities have over
a given place. It has the same named levels and rules as mana, but is completely
independent from it. Most places are normal sanctity. Higher sanctity can be
found in temples or other places holy to the deity. Lower sanctity usually means
you're in a place that's holy to the deity's enemies.

So even if a cleric has some spell overlap with their wizard buddy, that can
still be useful if they find themselves no a no-mana zone that's still normal
sanctity.

### Holy Might

These powers depend on living a virtuous life. In addition to having Power
Investiture, the cleric needs to accept a specific -10 point disadvantage that
restricts their behavior, as we saw above. A player who doesn't like the three
choices can work with the GM to choose some other appropriate disadvantage.

You must obey your chosen principles - failing to do so means losing access to
your holy abilities until you make some _significant_ penance.

The upside to this is that holy abilities are, well, divine powers. They don't
count as "magic", and so cannot be Dispelled and are not affected by Magic
Resistance. They also cost no FP to use and don't depend on ambient sanctity - a
virtuous cleric can use them even in the depths of Hell.

This section contains a list of holy powers typical of clerics:

- **Contingency Casting** (14 points/level): Once per session per level, you can
  cast any divine spell at a skill level of IQ + Power Investiture. Even if you
  don't know it, and even if you don't have the minimum Power Investiture to
  learn it. You still obey all other restrictions (like ambient sanctity and FP
  cost).

- **Detect Evil** (18 points): With a second of concentration, you can roll to
  detect nearby sources of evil, by either focusing on a specific object or the
  general are around you. You also get a hint as to the power of anything you
  detect, and a vague clue about its nature. Critical success in the
  identification roll provides details.

- **Divine Guidance** (14 points): This works like the Intuition
  advantage. Given a bunch of options to choose, you can roll to figure out the
  correct path. It's a bit cheaper because it's a Holy power, subject to the
  restrictions above.

- **Divine Omens** (14 points): Once per day, you can check for omens in the
  world around you. There are secret rolls both to detect and to interpret them,
  and the better you do the more information you get about the future. Critical
  failure means the GM lies.

- **Faith Healing** (33 points): Non-spell divine healing! Unlike the other
  powers, this one does cost FP proportional to how much you heal, but it's not
  dependent on sanctity like a spell. You can also try to restore crippled limbs
  or cure diseases. Cumulative uses of the same type of healing on the same
  target give -3 per extra attempt.

- **Turning** (24 points): The classic power to turn undead. It works on any
  undead that's also labeled "truly evil", or who's animated by magic described
  as such. If you win the Quick Contest of Will against the target creatures,
  you keep them at bay for as long as you concentrate on this power, and for 1d
  seconds afterwards. No mass undead destruction here - that's why you have
  companions.

Note that Holy Warriors also use Holy Might, so a Cleric could also acquire any
of the Holy abilities listed on the Holy Warrior's section and vice-versa.

## Customization Notes

Disadvantage-wise, "intolerant inquisitor" and "compassionate saint" are the two
big choices here. Most of the section is spent on spell list recommendations,
with one example centered on buffs, one on healing, and another on supernatural
warfare with spells effective against creatures like demons and undead.

Even if GMs don't allow "multiclassing" (i.e., picking special powers from other
templates), clerics still have access to the Holy Might powers listed under the
Holy Warrior template. So if you want to go in a more paladin-y direction with
your Cleric, you can focus on increasing combat skills and buying appropriate
Holy Warrior powers with earned points.

## Next Up

The Druid!
