---
layout: post
title: "The Cast of the D&D Cartoon as Dungeon Fantasy Delvers"
tags:
    - gurps
---

Yes, there was a D&D cartoon, and it was awesome. It aired in the US from 1983
to 1985, and it ran in Brazil as part of a children's show kind of thing in the
late 80s and early 90s. It had excellent production values for the time, which
is no wonder given that it was animated by Toei. I can't tell you much about the
original voice cast, but the Brazilian one was pretty awesome. This is probably
the game's most successful foray into mainstream media properties, as the movies
they'd make 15 years later were kind of disappointing. A whole generation of
Brazilian roleplayers probably owes their interest in the hobby to this show. I
know I do!

The plot synopsis for the show wouldn't be out of place in an isekai anime: a
group of kids gets on a D&D ride in a theme part, a bizarre magical accident
happens, and it transports them to a fantasy world. As soon as they arrive
they're met by a powerful being who calls himself The Dungeon Master and given
awesome magical weapons to help them survive.

There are some important differences from what would become the standard isekai
anime formula in the future, of course. We have an actual adventuring party
here, not just one guy, and they're actively looking for a way back home. Most
episodes start with an appearance by Dungeon Master to deliver them a clue on
how to do that, followed by a cryptic but relevant prophecy. These clues always
lead to awesome adventures, which is why we're watching the show in the first
place. They very often also lead our heroes into battle against Venger, a
demonic-looking wizard who is almost as powerful as Dungeon Master and considers
him a mortal enemy. Venger wants to steal the kid's artifact weapons and drain
their power, which would make him strong enough to conquer the world. We also
get a few appearances by Tiamat and one by Lolth.

The cartoon was apparently considered too violent by many adult critics in the
80s, but it's actually a lot less violent than a typical D&D session even at the
time. While it does contain fights, the kids usually dispatch "mooks" by
distracting and restraining them rather than resorting to murder, and they tend
to run from big monsters rather than stand and fight. Though their artifacts are
referred to as "magic weapons", not all of them are actual weapons, and even
those who are tend to be used in more indirect ways.

The show had 27 official episodes divided into three seasons. Writer Michael
Reaves scripted a finale for it, titled "Requiem", that explained a lot of
things and finally gave the kids a clean shot at going home. The actual
resolution was left in the air to leave room for a possible fourth season with a
reworked formula. Unfortunately, the show was canceled before the script could
be turned into an episode.

In 2020, a group of American fans finally produced an episode based on Requiem,
using assets from the original show and giving it a more definite resolution to
give us that sweet, sweet closure. You can watch that [here][1]. A group of
Brazilian fans released a [fan dub][2] of it in 2021.

Now that I'm done gushing about this awesome show, let's get to the reason for
this article. RPG.net apparently has a "January Character Creation Challenge"
going that expects participants to make a character every day. While I have no
intention of fulfilling this requisite it did provide me with the motivation for
trying to stat the D&D protagonists for use in Dungeon Fantasy.

This is a very interesting challenge, because our heroes are most certainly
_not_ the typical DF powerhouses built on 250+ points. They are a bit stronger
and luckier than "realistic" teenagers, and they do get more skilled as the show
advances, but early on most of their ability to survive comes from their
artifact weapons.

So this is what I'm going to do: I'll stat them up as 62-point characters using
the excellent **Delvers To Grow** book as a guide. I'll aim for stats that
reflect the way in which the kids actually 'fight' in the show, and explain how
this would work in GURPS. This requires some adjustments to the campaign
itself - they're meant for a game that recreates the vibe of the cartoon, not
for an edgy remake full of blood and murder.

Instead of following the standard rules for starting cash and equipment, I'll
give the kids armor that visually matches what they wear in the show, and of
course I'll give them their extremely unfair artifact weapons.

Armor in the original show is pretty much cosmetic. It never encumbers the
protagonists, but they also never rely on it for protection. Our GURPS version
will have its DR because extra insurance is always good, but will be enchanted
to be lighter if that becomes necessary.

The weapons on the other hand, will be on the high end of the DF Artifact power
curve. After all, we see other magic weapons appear some times but Venger is
only interested in the ones wielded by our heroes. Though the kids only ever use
them for G-rated cartoon shenanigans, they are perfectly capable of being used
for standard DF combat.

[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1_6SeRRflo
[2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlCW1ms5egI
