---
layout: post
title: "Persistent D&Disms"
tags:
    - dnd
    - gurps
---

Lots of people refer to Dungeons & Dragons as "generic", particularly when
criticizing it, but that's not quite true. What it gives you is a very specific
brand of fantasy, with several assumptions that aren't true in any other source
that is not itself D&D-inspired. GURPS calls it "Dungeon Fantasy" and dedicates
a very large series of supplements _and_ a standalone game to emulating it.

Seeing how GURPS decided to implement these persistent D&D-isms helps a lot with
spotting them in the first place, since they're not baked into the base
game. And once you know they're there, you can remove them and begin making more
diverse fantasy settings.

The ones I'm going to talk about here have mostly to do with the D&D class
system[^1]. From what I understand, back in the mists of D&D prehistory, before
publication, the game had two classes: "Fighting Man" and "Magic User". The
first was meant to depict any character who made physical combat their
specialty. The second was meant to depict anyone who primarily used
magic.

As the game moved on to publication and then through successive commercial
editions, more classes were added. Each one carved their niche from the big
generic block of the two originals, and each one appeared because their authors
thought they were cool. Aragorn is awesome, let's add a 'Ranger' class that does
what he did in the books. Conan is cool, let's add a Barbarian. Things got a bit
more systematic later on but at that point there was already a huge number of
legacy classes that both players and authors felt must be part of the game, so
you began to get a bunch of retroactive justifications for each class's
existence.

This leads to a kind of "strict taxonomy" of classes where each of them embodies
a very specific set of tropes and cliches. This reinforces the idea that the
cliches belonging to the same class _must_ belong together in all settings, and
that they can't belong to another class. This can lead to a certain sameness in
D&D-like settings, and also to the perpetuation of some crummy stereotypes.

Let's take a look at these assumptions, and at how to possibly remove them.

## The "Original Sin"

The very first D&D-ism is, of course, the idea that fighters and magic-users are
entirely separate character types. "Martials cannot use magic" is a more
important defining aspect than "martials are good at fighting". And while the
image of a wizard as a weird person in a robe is older than D&D by a few
decades, the idea that a wizard _must_ be a weird person in a robe is very much
a D&D-ism.

The surest way to tell whether a story or game is inspired or influenced by D&D
is to look for this divide. Even Exalted does this: while every player character
has access to actual frigging magical powers, it still makes a distinction
between those and "Sorcery", which is what lets you cast real spells, and which
incentivizes you to wear weird robes.

Of course, D&D itself went on to establish "sub-divisions" of this in its
subsequent editions.

## Strict Spellcaster Taxonomy

The very earliest versions of D&D just had a generic "magic user" class, but
this quickly changed. Modern D&D has wizards, and clerics, and druids, and
psions, and each of them is an entirely different type of character. Wizards
can't heal people, clerics can't cast magic missile, and only a druid can make
vines grow really fast. Breaking one of these rules will have dire but
unspecified consequences for your campaign, or so the story goes.

A lot of lore has accrued around these mechanical niches, talking about how
wizards gain their powers from study and clerics get them from the gods, and so
on. The real life traditions and myths that served as an inspiration for these
classes are rather fuzzier on the subject. There's at least one out there that
says you learn magic through intense and diligent study on the nature of the
divine. Generally speaking, a magician is a magician, and the things they can do
don't conform to the D&D spell lists.

That's the view taken by most GURPS magic systems, even the the Magery system
that's included in the core books and expanded on GURPS Magic. Anyone with the
Magery advantage can learn any spell in the system, and it's up to the GM to
specify the metaphysics behind why that happens. GURPS had to heavily modify
this system to make it fit the dungeon fantasy paradigm.

Removing this particular assumption from a dungeon fantasy setting is
particularly easy. Back in 2017 I wrote a post titled [Agnostic Dungeon
Fantasy][1] that had several options to blur the lines between spellcasters. The
focus of that post was settings where all magic is "wizardly" in the D&D sense,
but its suggestions can just as easily be used in a setting with fuzzier
metaphysics, or one where magic is by definition divine or spiritual.

## Strict Fighter Taxonomy

This one is a bit trickier to explain, but like the spellcaster taxonomy it's
also a consequence of D&D's class system. The oldest editions of D&D just had
the "fighting man" class that was meant to represent anyone who specialized in
physical combat and/or warfare. Modern D&D has a whole bunch of "martial"
classes: fighters, barbarians, rogues, rangers, monks, duelists, swashbucklers,
and so on.

Where it gets a bit confusing is that while each magic class represents an
entire metaphysical worldview, each "martial" class represents a different
_fighting style_. Those are a lot less exclusive than metaphysical worldviews,
and yet they are given the same weight. So a fighter simply _can't_ learn to
stab people in their vulnerable bits for extra damage because only rogues can do
that. It's a fundamental law of the universe as important as the difference
between arcane and divine magic.

[1]: {{ "/2017/08/30/agnostic-dungeon-fantasy.md" | relative_url }}

[^1]: There are others, such as the ones tied to its "race" rules. Those have
    been discussed extensively in a lot of places lately.
