---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma: The Final Spoilers"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dragons-dogma
---

This blog started waay back in 2016, with the main goal of hosting an adaptation
of the Dragon's Dogma setting to GURPS. You can see the project page for it
[here][1].

I covered all aspects of the setting I could think of, following the "recipe"
laid out by the excellent **GURPS Adaptations** supplement. First we deal with
the high concept of the setting and the campaigns it supports, then we discuss
its places, then its character options, and finally its equipment and
treasure. Finally, I wrote up an entire bestiary for it, converting most of the
monsters from the game to GURPS. I'll let my readers tell me whether those are
_good_ conversions or not. I like them, but I'm biased.

One decision I made early in the process is that I'd try not to include any big
spoilers for the plot of the original game, for several reasons. Firstly, that
plot makes for a cool tabletop campaign on its own, and I didn't want to spoil
it for prospective players. And secondly, I hadn't gotten to the end of the game
yet and I wanted to see it all for myself before I wrote about it.

Thing is, not long after I finished the bestiary, I kinda stopped playing
Dragon's Dogma. You know how it is, shiny new console, new games, you promise
yourself you'll still install the old one to play its games and that never
happens again. The only thing I needed to do to finish the main story was to
cross the final portal and face the last boss. I was delaying it because I
wanted to finish the Dark Arisen expansion content first and see _its_ story.

Well, I figure enough time has passed that I should just go and finish this
grand project once and for all, so I watched a couple of Youtube videos and here
we are.

Of course, this contains **MAJOR SPOILERS** for the plot of Dragon's Dogma. The
game is quite old by this point, but if you don't know how it ends and have any
interest in playing through it yourself, go away.

## The Dragon's Dogma

So what is this famous Dragon's Dogma the game is titled after? What is this
all-binding grand design, so terrible you have two entire theme songs bemoaning
its existence and urging the player to "finish the cycle of eternal return"?

It's a bunch of pseudo-Nitzchean pseudo-Randian bullshit, that's what it
is. It's all about Will, you see. The will to live and to triumph. You're only
really alive if your Will is strong, and for your Will to be come strong it must
be tempered by adversity. If this adversity kills you or makes you give up, then
you weren't worthy of life anyway. This applies at all levels, from the
individual all the way to the whole friggin' world.

So, goes the Dogma, for the world to be worthy of existing, it must be overseen
by a will powerful enough to sustain it. That is the function of the being
worshipped as the Maker by the Faith, and whose title for himself is the
Seneschal.

The Seneschal is the final boss of Dragon's Dogma, which is actually pretty
typical for a JRPG. That final portal takes you straight to his throne room at
the center of the Rift, where he lays the game's final bits of exposition on
you. Let's see how the whole thing works from the point of view of an Arisen PC.

Basically, the whole plot of the game is one long "test of will", which
effectively acts as a job interview for the next Seneschal. The title brings
with it phenomenal cosmic powers, but given enough time the iron will required
to hold this title can falter. The current Seneschal tires of existence, and
begins looking for their replacement by sending a Dragon out into the world.

As all bullshit "tests of will", this one has many successive stages with many
paths to failure but only one to success.

A prospective candidate is one who chooses to fight the Dragon even though it's
hopeless. They become an Arisen. Those who run just die.

The Seneschal ensures that the Arisen's "destiny" is common knowledge, by
shaping society so that the legend gets preserved and disseminated. Those who
refuse this destiny, or die during the many adventures required to fulfill it,
prove themselves unworthy. In these cases, the Dragon rampages some more and
leaves. We meet some who "failed" this way in the main story, and a lot more of
them in the expansion.

Those who reach the Dragon get offered a surprise bargain, another test: they
can skip the whole "life-threatening fight" bit by sacrificing the person they
love the most to the Dragon. The Dragon leaves much more discreetly, and the
coward gets to keep their Arisen immortality and say they killed the
beast. While the Dragon does fulfill the bargain as promised, accepting it also
counts as a failure. Duke Edmun took this path, and the fact that he did is one
of the late game's big reveals.

Fighting the dragon _and losing_ is also a failure. This gets the Arisen
reincarnated as a [Lesser Dragon][3], an extra obstacle for the next candidate.

In the game's story, no one else in living memory has managed to slay the
Dragon, so no one is ready for what happens when the player character finally
does. With its dying breath, the creature punches a hole in the fabric of
reality, turning the mysterious Everfall under [Gran Soren][4] into a weird
infinite recursive pit full of side pocket dimensions that act as dungeons, full
of endgame monsters and mini-bosses. There's a portal somewhere in there that
can be activated with components gathered either in those mini-dungeons or in
the rest of the world. This task is made more difficult by the fact that killing
the Dragon robs its associated Arisen of their immortality. The ancient ones
crumble to dust, and the Duke becomes a frail old man who orders his entire army
to kill you.

The portal, once activated, lands you at the true center of the Rift, the
Seneschal's throne room. The Seneschal explains the whole rigmarole, and
proposes a "final final test" that's very similar to that of the Dragon.

The candidate can turn back and accept a "peaceful death", or they can keep
advancing and fight the Seneschal for the right to live and for the throne of
Creation. Those who turn back or who lose the fight again prove themselves
unworthy, and are instead reincarnated as the next _Dragon_.

To those who win the current Seneschal hands the Godsbane, the only weapon in
the universe capable of truly killing the deity. When the Arisen does the deed,
he gets the job.

All of this is meant to ensure that only someone with a very particular
definition of "unshakable will" makes it to the end. The new Seneschal gets to
use Phenomenal Cosmic Power to shape the worlds under their care for however
long it takes them to get tired of it all. And then they restart the selection
process. And that's how the successive links in the chain are forged.

The game goes to some lengths to emphasize how empty the existence of the
Seneschal is. The player can wander around the infinite empty expanse of the
throne room, or they can sit on the throne to walk around some of the game's
locations as an invisible and intangible presence.

The only way out of this whole "eternal chain" situation is to do something
completely unexpected - the Arisen turns the Godsbane on _themselves_. They die,
leaving the throne forever empty. The worlds are now free to exist naturally, no
longer stuck in the cyclic history the Dogma forced upon them. That's the game's
_good_ ending, the one you get when you succeed at every step of the bullshit
test and go beyond its design.

## How Did This Start?

Some dingus uncounted aeons ago read too much crappy philosophy and laid a curse
on the universe to make it fit his warped perceptions. That's my theory and I'm
sticking to it.

The game itself doesn't have much to say about how the cycle started. It's
enough to know that it's already happened a huge number of times and that the PC
breaks it (or, in the bad ends, that it keeps happening).

It does, however, give us a hint. One of those side dungeons in the Everfall
contains an extra-special super-secret boss named the Ur-Dragon. Gameplay-wise,
it the same as the main story Dragon but with much higher numbers, including a
frankly obscene HP total. It was meant to be an "online" boss - its stats are
monitored by a central server, and each individual player has only a limited
amount of time to fight it. Defeating the Ur-Dragon requires a huge collective
effort by many players.

The Ur-Dragon has a model that's very similar to the Dragon, with the main
difference being it has dozens of embedded Arisen hearts instead of just the
one. The model, the ridiculous strength, and the name suggest that this entity
was the _first_ Dragon. Maybe even now it's the one that goes out to select a
new Arisen when there is no "normal" Dragon around. And it's very likely the
asshole that started it out way back when.

## Addendum: Dark Arisen

Dark Arisen was a major expansion to the original Dragon's Dogma, so big it was
actually sold as a standalone title that included the full base game. Saves
transferred from one to the other, with people who had the original game gaining
a big money and resource bonus.

The major adition here is a huge "epic level" megadungeon named Bitterblack
Isle. Players could access it by talking to a new characted named Olra who
appeared in the Cassardis docks. She could take them to the Isle, which normally
lies beyond the reach of most ships (ships can't sail far in this setting -- too
many sea monsters). She says the island contains a great threat and asks for
your help in ridding it of its curse.

The Isle contains a megadungeon: a huge structure that stretches very far into
the underground, large enough that some of its levels contain entire
villages. Levels get harder the deeper you go, with big jumps in difficulty when
you cross to a deeper "stratum" of the dungeon (there are three of these). The
_easiest_ levels start out at about the same difficulty as the endgame version
of the Everfall (Ur-Dragon excluded). There are lots of monsters that only exist
there - usually the most powerful varieties I statted up in the Bestiary.

As expected, there are lots of old corpses strewn about all levels of the Isle
dungeon. Some of them are lootable, some clutch notes with their last words,
some are just bone shards at this point. _And every single one of them was an
Arisen_. All of them detoured from their "main" mission to explore this place,
either out of compassion for Olra's plight or out of greed for the sweet loot
littering its halls. None of them ever came back. This is a place that chews
up Arisen like a normal dungeon chews up level 1 adventurers.

At the very bottom of the deepest stratum, we find Daimon, the entity
responsible for creating the Isle. He too, used to be an Arisen.

[1]: {{ "/projects/dragons-dogma/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/gurps/2016/09/29/dragons-dogma-big-picture.html" | absolute_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2018/08/02/lesser-dragons.html" | relative_url }}
[4]: {{ "/gurps/2016/10/12/gran-soren.html" | absolute_url }}
