---
layout: post
title: "On Dragon Inflation (And Dragon Performance Anxiety)"
tags:
    - dungeons-and-dragons
    - gurps
    - shadowrun
    - dragons
---

Stop and think for a moment: when was the last time you took part in a proper
battle against a dragon in your RPG campaigns, either as a player or as a GM?
One that isn't a cutscene in disguise, where the PCs aren't supposed to run away
and actually have a shot at defeating the beast?

"People who read Octopus Carnival" might not be a very large sample set, but I
bet that even here there's not a lot who have done it in recent memory. If
you're a GM you probably hesitate to add dragons to your adventure because you
think your group isn't quite ready to fight something so powerful. If you're a
PC, you probably stay away from regions marked "Here Be Dragons" for the same
reason.

This is what I call Dragon Performance Anxiety. It's not a new phenomenon and
I'm certainly not the first one to talk about this. In fact, I'm writing _this_
because of a post on the same subject I once read on Dungeon Fantastic, and
which for the life of me I can't find the link to.

## Dragon Inflation in D&D

To understand this thing I'm calling "dragon inflation", I think it's important
to read [this post][3] from Semper Initiativus Unum that talks about what
dragons were like in the earliest days of D&D.

Though OD&D dragons already had a detailed power scale based on size, age and
scale color, they were a bit closer to the dragons of European mythology than
the towering, invincible beasts they would eventually become in subsequent
editions. An average dragon was probably about the size of a horse. Its hoard,
though still quite fabulous, could on average fill a bathtub or
refrigerator. And all dragons had about the same amount of treasure regardless
of power level, since they all rolled on the same table.

This means they presented players with an interesting exercise in risk
management, like many of the best elements of OD&D. If that hoard is guarded by
the weakest possible dragon, it's pretty much free treasure even for a level 1
party that can cast a single magic missile between them. If it's guarded by the
strongest, it's probably not worth the trouble.

Now, [this other post][1] from Merric's Musings is an excellent summary of how
D&D dragons changed over time, in more ways than its author intended. Through
it, you can see the ways in which dragons got more powerful as editions went by:
more age categories, more and more damaging physical attacks, larger sizes. The
ability to speak and use magic went from a percentage chance to a certainty for
all dragons, and that magic also got more powerful as time went by.

The author's attitude there also tells us a lot, because it mirrors that of a
lot of players and book authors that I've seen over time. There's a focus on
dragons at the higher end of the power scale as the "standard", and a persistent
idea that they should always be terrifying threats no matter how powerful your
PCs are. When a GM thinks dragons aren't enough of a threat for their group,
they inflate the monsters' power, and if that GM gets hired to write a book that
inflation gets enshrined as canon. And then the cycle repeats.



===================

You see, back in the olden days of Original D&D, dragons used to be dangerous,
but manageable opponents. The dragons were maybe the size of a horse, and their
hoards could fill a good-sized bathtub. All colors of dragons had about the same
amount of treasure too, so finding a lair tended to prompt a round of risk
assessment rather than a visceral need to run away.

They got a little stronger as time went on, to keep pace with the increased
power of the PCs, until the initial publication of the Forgotten Realms campaign
setting. As usual, Ed Greenwood has a lot to answer for! One of the distinctive
features of the Realms, according to those first books, was that dragons here
were much more powerful. It's from here that you get the image of a
building-sized dragon guarding a hoard the size of Uncle Scrooge's money
bin. And when AD&D Second Edition rolled around, FR dragons became the default.

This was right about when I started playing, so to me dragons were always these
impossibly though monsters that I _might_ get to see if I survive the
multiple-year process of getting from level 1 to level "high enough".

It doesn't matter that the actual rules include dragon stats appropriate for a
sizable chunk of the party's adventurer career. The text encourages GMs to think
of dragons as _special_. Fighting a dragon has to be a Big Deal. In my
experience, the GM's and player's eyes always drift toward the older age
categories of the most powerful dragon colors, and their minds always use that
as a gauge for what a dragon fight should be like. As such, they never quite
think that it's the right time to face a dragon. Either the GM doesn't place one
in the campaign, or they do and the players never work up the nerve to go there.

Third edition didn't to much to dispel these notions, but subsequent editions
tried to make it a little more obvious that you _can_ fight the game's titular
monster before you reach "demigodly superhero" levels of power.

## Dragon Performance Anxiety In Other Systems

Even if you don't play D&D, you've probably felt something similar to what I
described above. There's a whole lot of fantasy systems out there which take
heavy inspiration from the AD&D 2nd edition vision of dragons. And while AD&D
did actually include dragons appropriate for almost every point in a PC's
career, the same might not be true of these other systems.

Take Shadowrun, for example. This is a game that started by following the AD&D
2nd Edition party line ("Dragons are a Big Deal and You're Not Ready For Them"),
and never did anything to control its Dragon Inflation. Now your average
Shadowrun dragon is tougher than a tank and faster than a fighter jet, and also
an Illuminaty-level genius conspirator who is instantly able to grok modern
society despite having been asleep for the last ten thousand years. And that's
before we even get to the "special" named dragons that combine all of the above
with the worst in 90's-style NPC exceptionalism. Literally half of the latest
writeup of Denver I read is composed of variations on the idea that if you do
anything to displease the Great Dragon Ghostwalker, he will _know_, and he will
_end_ you.

Dungeon Fantasy doesn't go nearly that far. It's surprisingly close to OD&D in
its approach. The weakest statted dragon is a tough but manageable "boss"
challenge for a well-prepared party of moderately powerful adventurers, which in
this case refers to the starting power level of 250 points. It does not,
however, do much to dispel the decades of accumulated Dragon Performance Anxiety
people might feel from their previous experience with other systems.

## What's the point of all this again?

What did I write this for? Well, it turns out I'm suffering from a little Dragon
Performance Anxiety myself, and I need to get it out of my system. About the
only monsters left to write up in my [Dragon's Dogma bestiary][2] are the
dragon-class monsters like the Hydra and the actual dragons. I stalled for the
longest time on these. Could I make them enough of a Big Deal, or would I mess
up their stat blocks? It wasn't until the DFRPG box set came out that I felt I
had enough of a yardstick to measure them against. And now I think I'm ready to
start writing them up, finally.

The solution to this anxiety, of course is to just let it go. Accept that it's
okay to have dragons that your party can fight before they reach the "demigodly
superhero" level of power, and that a dragon fight doesn't have to be this
absolutely perfect set piece that happens at the absolutely best dramatic moment
possible. It's time I start taking that advice!


[1]: https://merricb.com/2015/04/12/the-original-dragons-of-dungeons-dragons/
[2]: {{ "/projects/dragons-dogma/" | absolute_url }}
[3]: https://initiativeone.blogspot.com/2015/09/more-dragons-in-dungeons.html

[^1]: I seriously once saw a Shadowrun fan gloat that they'd never play _GURPS_
    because they didn't like class-and-level systems.
