---
layout: post
title: "Dungeon Souls"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---


I've been meaning to write something like this for a while now, and now that
there are rumors of actual Dark Souls-based RPGs I feel like it's become
topical.

There's an official Dark Souls game in Japan that might get an English
translation, and there's someone else planning to write a D&D 5 adaptation. And
here I'd like to talk about how I would write an adaptation of my own.

## What Makes a "Soulsborne" Game?

The video game genre known as "Soulsborne" takes its name from two of its most
famous representatives: Dark Souls and Bloodborne. It's a genre notable for
being mostly made up of games from a single company, From Software. They've
released the first game in the genre (Demons' Souls), and kept on improving and
varying the formula ever since.

There are many different factors that come together to make a game feel like
it's part of this genre.

#===============================================================================

Dungeon Fantasy campaigns traditionally rely on two main types of reward to keep
those delvers coming back: treasure and experience. Experience means character
points, and we all know what those do. As for treasure, it's usually further
divided into a couple of sub-types: items and money.

Items include all magic items, of course, but also mundane equipment that the
party intends to keep and use. That suit of epic plate might be entirely
non-magical, but it still provides a significant boost to the knight who's
currently making do with light scale.

Money includes not only coins, but also anything whose primary utility is being
sold in town. Gems, jewelry, art objects, and also any items which the party
doesn't want to keep. PCs use this money to buy other things they do want, and
it's also usually the main in-character motivation for them to pick a career in
dungeon delving in the first place.

However, mere greed isn't a motivation that fits all campaigns. It's entirely
possible to play in a setting without a monetary economy at all. "Havens and
Hells", from Pyramid #3/89, is such a setting. You could also take inspiration
from the famous Dark Souls video game franchise and have a setting with a
variant economy where money is worthless.

These games usually take place in bleak realms where the ratio of "dungeon" to
"town" is inverted. "Town" is a single building. Almost everything outside this
building wants to kill you. The exceptions are usually beleaguered, scattered
survivors whom you rescue and bring back to your safehouse so they can sell you
things... and they charge in souls.

Killing a monster in this setting allows you to siphon off some of its "soul
energy". You can spend it to increase your own stats, or you can transfer it to
a friendly NPC in exchange for weapons or useful items. They presumably use this
energy to sustain themselves and make more stuff. So there's a certain amount of
tension between character advancement and equipment upgrades. Investing too
heavily in one will delay the other. Finding a magic item out in the dungeon is
doubly fortunate because you get a cool new thing and you can use the souls you
would have spent buying it to improve your stats.

Read on to learn how to implement this mechanic in your games! It works quite
well in settings where the metaphysics are screwed up and gold is worthless. The
already mentioned Havens and Hells provide a ready-made example, in which these
rules would fit pretty much seamlessly. An Eberron campaign where the PCs are
trapped in the Mournland, or one that takes place in a world taken over by the
Dreams of Ruin, are also good examples. It is of course far better to start a
new game in such a setting than to pull a surprise switch on your players.

## Souls in Your Campaign

In order to implement this mechanic in either version of Dungeon Fantasy, the
main things we need to do is a) establish the value of a "soul point" and b)
establish a conversion rate between soul points and character points.

Establishing value is trivial. A "soul point" in GURPS should be worth $1! It's
the basic unit of currency in a campaign where it appears, so that makes
sense. It also results in serious adventuring equipment costing on the order of
hundreds or thousands of soul points, which is similar to the scale used by the
original games.

As for the conversion rate, that has also been done for us. In standard DF, you
can spend 1 character point during character creation to get extra money equal
to half your starting wealth. In a campaign with a "dungeon souls" mechanic,
therefore, you can convert a number of soul points equal to half the campaign's
starting wealth ($500 by default) into one character point!

### Acquiring Soul Points

There's two main ways to acquire soul points in the original games. One is by
defeating enemies, as already mentioned. Each defeated enemy gives you a certain
amount, with more powerful enemies giving out more. The other is by collecting
the soul residues of slain adventurers, which stay as items in your inventory
and can be "used" to be converted into a certain amount of soul points.

Both translate into DF fairly seamlessly. Those "residues" simply take the place
of monetary treasure caches, resulting into the type of scene where the PCs
ignore a huge pile of gold to instead absorb the memories of the dead thief next
to it.

Soul points from monsters are a bit trickier. One possible way is to say that
each monster "drops" a number of soul points equal to its Combat Effectiveness
Rating. Calculating this requires use of the somewhat complex system in Pyramid
#3/77, though by now you can probably find one or more lists with CERs for even
published monster throughout the Internet. This will usually result in a number
between 100 and 200 for most "worthy" monsters. A simpler solution might be to
simply give 50-75 per fodder monster, 100-150 for worthies, and bigger totals
for bosses.

In either case, you'll likely want to split earned soul points evenly between
PCs, to avoid kill-stealing and the like. They'll end up working much like XP in
D&D in that regard.

### Spending Soul Points


The most basic use of soul points is for sustenance. Since we're assuming a
desolate hellscape of a setting, farming is usually out of the
question. Therefore, a character (PC or NPC) can spend 150 soul points to keep
themselves alive for the next 7 days without the need for food or water. That
doesn't guarantee accomodation - find a clean spot on the floor of your one safe
building and camp there. It does make venturing out a little easier since you
don't have to worry about carrying rations.

Soul points can also be transfered between characters. This forms the basis for
an economy of sorts. Anyone who is willing to trade with the PCs will trade in
soul points. Prices might be standard for relatively friendly vendors, but that
weird goblin out in the middle of the dungeon will likely add a markup to its
wares.

They can also be used for advancement. The Souls games usually include an NPC
that will convert soul power into increased stats, but you might also rule that
this just takes some meditation on the part of the character. PCs in a game that
uses this mechanic don't gain character points normally - they must exchange 500
soul points for each character point.



#==============================================================================

There's this company called From Software, which makes games whose names end in
"Souls". Demons's Souls was the first, but the franchise really took off with
the Dark Souls series. That one has three games, and kind of started a
genre. Lots of games followed those, some from other companies, some from, well,
From.

People have taken to calling this genre "Soulsborne" in reference to the Souls
series and Bloodborne. This post will attempt to bring some of their atmosphere
to the tabletop, using GURPS Dungeon Fantasy as a base. Of course, the advice
here could also be repurposed for other systems.

## What Not to Adapt

The most famous trait of games in this genre is that they're _super hard_, but
that's not actually something new to tabletop RPGs. Nor is the inevitable tide
of people claiming that the games are not hard at all and it's you who needs to
"git gud".

The things you need to do in order to be successful at a Souls game are the same
things you need to do in order to survive a tabletop dungeon: pay attention to
your surroundings at all times, always be wary of traps and ambushes, know how
your enemies operate and how to counter them. It also helps to read the module
behind the GM's back.

So, in summary, you don't need to import any of the Souls series' dastardly
level design techniques because you already have plenty of perfectly serviceable
RPG books on how to design deathtrap dungeons. Most of those techniques were
imported from there in the first place!

Similarly, you don't need to change anything about character
creation. Characters in Souls games match pretty well with those you can meet at
any D&D or Dungeon Fantasy table. Sure, those games have their own systems, but
you're still playing knights, wizards, and other medieval fantasy staples. Even
when the look and feel is a bit different (like in Bloodborne or Sekiro), it's
still usually something most dungeon fantasy systems can handle.

There are some things those games do differently, and that could work well on
the tabletop. We'll look at them next.

## The Tiny Town

While all of the Souls games have slightly different settings, they all have one
thing in common that sets them apart from most tabletop settings: the ratio of
Dungeon to Town is inverted. If you want to make your tabletop campaign
"Souls-like", this is the single most effective way of doing so.

Your typical Dungeon Fantasy setting is mostly Town! The Dungeon is where
adventure happens, while Town is safe and is where the delvers sell their loot
and spend their money. Town feels small because its gameplay elements are
largely abstracted, but it actually makes up most of the game world.

In a classic megadungeon arrangement there is only one dungeon and the whole
world outside it is Town. Other settings have multiple dungeons of varying size
and danger level, and perhaps some wilderness between them, but they also have
whole kingdoms that are essentially "safe".

The settings of Souls games subvert this by making "Town" be as small as it
feels in a classic megadungeon campaign. Their "Town" is literally a _single
building_ where most of the friendly NPCs you'll ever encounter live. Everywhere
else, from the moment your foot steps out of this building's door, is Dungeon,
and potentially deadly.

This usually serves to reinforce the bleakness of the setting in question. The
"town" building is clearly not meant for prolonged habitation, and the PCs and
NPCs who live there are effectively refugees. What goes in there is also made as
concrete as what goes on in the dungeon. A big town in a normal campaign might
have a whole street full of armorers and your PC is assumed to be spending a few
hours going through them all when you want to buy a weapon, and you usually
abstract that process by just picking what you want out of a list. In a Souls
campaign, you go to the one single armorer who camps by his improvised forge,
and the list of available gear is literally what he has ready at the time. If
you don't have an armorer in there, you can't buy weapons!

Some of these NPCs seem like they'd be adventurers in their own right, but by
the time you get to them they've lost the will to delve. Or maybe they can still
go out, either together with the PCs or separately, but if they die there's no
one to replace them.

This doesn't rule out the possibility that there's a normal world somewhere
"out there", but since the PCs can't get to it, it's effectively not part of the
setting. Escaping to that "normal world" might well be the final goal of the
campaign!

## Money, or the Lack Thereof

I mentioned buying stuff in the last step, and how this is done in a more
concrete manner than usual. There's another important setting element that Souls
games add here.

If Town consists of a single building, it doesn't really have what you'd call a
traditional economy. There's no wide-ranging trade network that your suppliers
are plugged into. Therefore, money is worthless. As the genre name says, it's
all about souls.

This talk of "souls" essentially means that the experience system is a concrete
in-character thing, instead of being an abstraction like usual. The "Dungeon" in
these games is a place where souls are laid bare. When you kill a monster, you
harvest its "soul energy", which is a source of power. You can use it to sustain
yourself in place of food, to stoke the fires of a forge, and to increase your
own personal power. You don't get normal experience in this game: it's all soul
energy.

So when you buy a weapon from your friendly armorer, you're paying in soul
energy, and you must balance the benefits of that shiny new weapon against
another point of skill or a new spell.

Fortunately, GURPS has a pretty easy way to implement that mechanic! One CP gets
you half your starting wealth in money during character creation. That's $500 in
Dungeon Fantasy campaigns, but it can be more or less depending on the tech
level of your speficic game.

Therefore, you can measure "soul energy" in the same scale you would measure
currency! One "soul point" is worth $1 when making commercial transactions. And
PCs would improve their stats by converting soul points into CP using the ratio
established above (500 soul points for 1 CP in standard Dungeon Fantasy). If
you're using an old-school D&D variant, things remain easy: 1 soul point is
worth 1 GP when trading and 1 XP when used for advancement. Newer editions might
need a different converson rate.

How much soul energy a monster "drops" is directly correlated with its
power. D&D has helpfully catalogued exactly how much XP a monster is worth in
all of its editions. For GURPS, you could choose to stick with the CP rewards
outlined in Dungeon Fantasy and convert them to soul points (so a "typical"
combat gives 500 SP to each delver). If you want to be more detailed than that,
you can perhaps give out SP equal to the defeated monster's Combat Effectiveness
Rating (see Pyramyd #3/77: Combat).

Treasure still has its place in such a campaign: any weapon or item you find out
in the Dungeon is one you don't have to spend your souls to buy, and of course
found items might be more powerful than anything your armorer could make
themselves. _Monetary_ treasure is entirely worthless, but you can still place
piles of gold out in the Dungeon if it's a post-apocalyptic region, as a
reminder of how things were before and possibly as a way mock the PCs.

## Prepare to Die

There's one other thing Souls games do: they expect you to die. A lot. Players
who have already mastered the cautious style these games demand have an easier
time here, but even then are going to die repeatedly before they "git gud" at
the particular game they're playing.

Death in these games is not the end, and there's no real Game Over from dying,
but there are some incentives not to die. The same story excuse that makes you
come back from the dead also leaves you in a diminished state until you can
spend a limited resource to go back to full strength. You also lose any unspent
soul points you had on you, and must reach the location where you died to
reclaim them. If you die again before you do, they're gone.

This is quite different from how death is usually handled in tabletop games, of
course. Traditionally, coming back from the dead requires high-level magic and
is a lot more expensive. Unless the money and the magic are available, death is
permanent. That puts a lot more pressure on PCs to be careful! Ultimately, it's
up to you to decide how easy it is to come back from the dead in a tabletop
Souls game, and what's the excuse behind this.

Something closer to the video games would give PCs a finite number of
"lives". Dying returns you to your home base in a weaker state (usually modeled
by reducing your maximum HP). Each death leaves you weaker, until you don't come
back at all, or come back as a mindless monster out in the Dungeon. Either way,
that character is done. Some rare consumable items can reset your counter and
return you to full power.

Something closer to the tabletop experience would make death permanent unless
your surviving companions take steps to get you back. Maybe there's a cleric NPC
that can be rescued and is capable of ressurecting dead PCs, but that would
require an amount of soul points commensurable with the monetary cost of the
service in a traditional campaign (15000 in Dungeon Fantasy). Such an NPC might
be available immediately, or might need to be found and rescued in some part of
the dungeon.

The easier it is to return from the dead, the deadlier you can make the Dungeon!
You also need to decide what happens to a dead PC's soul points, since it's
likely their suriving companions will be nearby. Can the companions recover the
soul points immediately, or does the dead character have to do it themselves
once they return? Whatever you decide is sure to have an interesting effect in
party dynamics if resurrection is tabletop-like.

It's also important to decide how to introduce new characters in the campaign,
should someone die permanently or should a player wish to switch
characters. They can't just wander in from Town, because Town is the one
building. The easiest way might be to place these new PCs inside the dungeon,
where they can be rescued by the group like the NPCs.

## In Conclusion..

The introduction of the three elements outlined above, combined with traditional
dungeon design techniques and gameplay, should be more than enough to make a
campaign feel like a Souls video-game.

There's actually a published setting in Pyramid that kinda goes this way
(_Havens and Hells_, in Pyramid #3/89: Alternate Dungeons II).
