---
layout: post
title: "Equipment Upgrades in Dungeon Fantasy"
category: gurps
---

While the [previous post][1] gives you a pretty complete picture of the gear
available to Gransys adventurer's, there's one aspect left to cover that can
really bring that Dragon's Dogma feel: equipment upgrades. Obviously, these
rules can also be used to good effect in generic **Dungeon Fantasy** games.

## Upgrades in the original game

The original game not only has a very extensive selection of equipment, it also
allows the player to _upgrade_ each of those items. Certain weapon vendors can
apply from one to three upgrade levels to a weapon or a piece of armor. Each one
increases its damage or protection value and decreases its weight. This both
costs money and requires "special components". More often than not, that means
_monster parts_, though some might require specific types of ore or
miscellaneous items like buckets and sconces instead. It's unclear whether these
upgrades are a mundane or magical process.

In addition to this, when the player kills a dragon there's a chance that their
equipment may be "Dragonforged", which improves it beyond what's possible with
the normal upgrades. These and the further alchemical "refinements" possible in
the **Dark Arisen** expansion are definitely magical. They also have a nice
mythic resonance!

The game does still have a sizable selection of weapons of increasing
effectiveness that's common to most electronics RPGs. Sometimes it's better to
trade up to a better weapon, and sometimes it's better to keep upgrading the one
you have. Generally, though, you want to keep getting better weapons until the
very end of the game, when you pick a high-level set that has the abilities you
want and max their upgrades out.

## Designing the Upgrade System for GURPS

We've seen what the system in the original game looked like. Does something like
that have a place in the tabletop version? If so, can we implement it without
needing to come up with a detailed list of monster parts required for each of
the hundreds of entries in GURPS' gear books?

The "upgrade pattern" for weapons and armor in **GURPS Dungeon Fantasy**
resembles the end-game pattern for Dragon's Dogma from the start. PCs either
start with their preferred weapon and armor types, or acquire them very soon
into the game, and from that point on they seek to improve either the _quality_
or the _enchantments_ in their gear.

The big difference here is that "upgrading" a piece of gear in DF means
replacing it with an entirely new piece that was either bought in town or found
in a dungeon. You can't really add better quality descriptors to a given item,
which is realistic. And while you _can_ add or replace enchantments to a magic
weapon by the rules, in DF the best magic is usually found as dungeon loot. When
that happens, it's better to use the new item than to cling to the old one.

An upgrade system should challenge that assumption. It should give PCs the means
to improve both the quality and the magic of a given piece of gear without
having to replace it. It should give them tangible benefits for choosing this
route over the traditional one, but it shouldn't be so good that replacing gear
is never a feasible option.

One benefit of an upgrade system is that an upgraded item _is still the same
item_. This gives players a little more incentive to invest in Signature Gear,
Weapon Bond, or Armor Bond without fear that the points spent in these perks
will be wasted. Another benefit is that it can be slightly cheaper to upgrade an
item if the player can meet the necessary conditions.

## The Upgrade System: Gransys Alchemy

As we said in previous posts, enchantment in Gransys isn't the province of
wizards. Instead it's an expression of mastery in artisanship, borrowing from
the old belief that each artisan learned the secret magic of their own
profession as they progressed in skill. It's a lot more similar to alchemy than
to standard spellcasting - through knowledge of these secrets, an armorer can
_refine_ a weapon or suit of armor and get it closer to its platonic ideal,
turning a cheap, rusted sword into a fine blade fit for a hero.

These secrets are jealously guarded, and usually the province of NPCs. Anyone
who knows them is more than able to make a comfortable living without needing to
mess with dungeon-delving! Some of these processes do require rare ingredients
only found in dangerous places, but that's what adventurers are for.

[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/gurps/2016/11/22/equipment-part-1.html
