---
layout: post
title: "Faces of Villainy"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dnd
    - cyberpunk
    - shadowrun
---

It seems to be a common experience for me to find some good ideas in Cyberpunk
RED and then be a bit disappointed by how they were implemented. Yes, I already
made the obligatory rant about cyberpsychosis as a way to limit a PC's implants
[here][1]. I'm here today to talk about another such concept: Faces.

Cyberpunk-the-genre, particularly in its tabletop RPG implementations, has a lot
of big and impersonal antagonistic forces. Megacorps, big crime syndicates,
government agencies, and others have a stranglehold on these settings and are
responsible for a lot of the fucked up stuff in them. It's an easy decision to
pick one of them as the antagonist in an adventure, but it's hard to quantify
what they can actually _do_ in that adventure, and the sort of impact a victory
for the PCs would have on the organization.

A lot of GMs might dive head-first into the supposed bleakness of their settings
and say that nothing the PCs do makes any difference. They might survive and
make some money, but at the end of the day the corp completes its evil plan
anyway because they're big and rich and that means they're infallible. There's
nothing a party of 4-5 people with guns can do to change things. Deviate too
much from the script and the corp will thrown armies at the characters to teach
them a lesson.

I could go on a couple of rabbit-hole rants about this, but I will instead focus
on this nifty concept CP RED came up with. They call it the Face and it's about
giving those big impersonal antagonists an individual who's responsible for
making decisions and taking the consequences for their organization.

Of course, just like it does with cyberware capacity rules and cyberpsychosis,
the game goes on to tie this into the setting in an overly exaggerated manner by
saying there's an actual in-setting law that demands such organizations nominate
a single person who speaks for them and is legally liable for their crimes and
so on.

I feel this is too limited. That exact implementation might be nice if you're
regularly dealing with epic stories that involve the highest leadership of
multinational corps and crime syndicates, but it does nothing for those street
level campaigns every online GM seems to prefer. Hanako doesn't know or care
about the problems Arasaka is inflicting on your Night City street rats this
week. She will likely never hear about them.

## What I'd Do Instead:

The concept of an "organizational face" has no place as something that's
tangible in the fiction, but it's an excellent out-of-character adventure design
tool. So let's use it that way!

When you pick a megacorp or other big org as your antagonist for this adventure,
its "local Face" is whoever is directly responsible for the PC's predicament in
that adventure. They're the ones calling the shots on today's sinister scheme,
the ones who stand to benefit the most from it, and the ones who will suffer the
consequences of whatever the PCs do to thwart it. This _might_ be the person in
charge of the whole corp at high enough levels of play, but it will be someone
lower at the hierarchy in most scenarios.

A "local Face" helps bring things into sharper focus. They have a specific
personality, they have character flaws, they have imperfect knowledge, and a
constrained set of resources to call upon. Maybe your street rats have no chance
of taking down the entire Arasaka corporation, but the lecherous local manager
who's trying to demolish that orphanage and has a few paid-off gangers and a
small team of bodyguards at his disposal is another story.

And when you take down the local Face, the immediate problem does go
away. Cyberpunk corporations and equivalent orgs are full of viciously feuding
factions who spend more time tearing each other apart than doing their actual
jobs. The Face's defeat causes them or their bosses to lose, well, face, and
have their ongoing plots derailed by rivals who want to enact their own evil
plans somewhere else. Maybe the corp has them fired or killed, pinning the blame
for the whole thing on them to limit damage to the larger org.

And no, there will be no death squads dispatched against the PCs as
vengeance. Those rivals I mentioned might even be thankful to them for what was
essentially free help.

[1]: {{ "/2023/10/23/on-cyberpsychosis.md" | relative_url }}
