---
layout: post
title: "FORTRAN and gaming"
tags:
    - opinion
    - gurps
---

"You can write FORTRAN in any language", the joke goes.

FORTRAN (short for "formula translation") is the very first high level
programming language. Before its invention in 1954, people programmed computers
by writing raw machine code or by rewiring the hardware directly.

Since it was the first high level language, FORTRAN lacked many of the
convenience features we take for granted in contemporary programming
languages. It was still easier to write than raw assembly, but not by a
lot[^1].

Some started making this joke because people who started out programming FORTRAN
would move on to other languages but they'd still write their code using the
same idioms they did when writing FORTRAN. Their code would read like a FORTRAN
program, and it'd ignore a lot of the quality-of-life features the newer
language had. This would often give rise to bugs of the sort you wouldn't
normally expect to see in that kind of program.

The principle behind the joke applies to a lot of other technologies in the
world of programming. For a number of years at the start of the 21st century,
people used XML for _everything_. Some companies used this phenomenom to their
advantage: one of the early selling points of Microsoft's C# language was that
it was extremely similar to Java and so Java programmers could easily switch to
it.

## The Joke Works On Gaming Too

D&D is kind of the FORTRAN of RPGs. It's the first RPG, or at least the first
one to be codified as such. It's received updates up to the present day. It's a
fine system when used for its intended purpose.

And you can play D&D in any system.

This is not about rules, mind you. It's about assumptions, both about the basic
format of the game itself and what PCs are expected to do in the campaign. I
guess it's a bit harder for me to put that into words more specific than the
FORTRAN joke, but I'm sure a lot of GMs reading this have experienced something
similar.

Like, I have some friends who are into Ars Magica. They sometimes try to get a
game going. The usual GM in these games is a very patient and learned individual
who builds detailed campaign locations based on well-researched bits of history
blended with region- and time-appropriate folklore.

And then the usual players go into those detailed locations to play D&D With An
All-Wizard Party. Troupe play is not a thing that happens (the wizard is "the
real PC"), and every session I've witnessed was spent in a zoomed-in "adventure
mode" with no thought given to the passage of seasons. With another GM at the
helm the game becomes even more about going into holes in the ground to kill and
loot monsters than usual.

A lot of these friends were also part of my "real-time" groups, and I remember
that one of them in particular had a lot of trouble getting out of the D&D
mindset. He'll play any system as long as he can be an elf druid or bard.

And of course we can't forget the Star Wars fan who believes that every Star
Wars RPG adaptation, for any system, must have a system of Force Powers that
mirrors the one in Star Wars d20 as closely as possible.

Like FORTRAN veterans who continue to write FORTRAN in other languages, these
players were still very much in a traditional D&D mindset when engaging with
other systems.

[^1]: Modern FORTRAN did gain many of these conveniences and remains a fine
    language when used for its intended purpose.
