---
layout: post
title: "The Guns of Wolfenstein, Part 03: The New Order"
tags:
    - gurps
---

In [Part 2][1] of this series, we took a look at the guns that appear on
Wolfenstein: The Old Blood, whose timeline I named "Wolfenstein-2" for ease of
reference. The timeline from the 2001 game, whose guns I talked about [here][2],
was Wolfenstein-1.

### Plot Overview (Contains Spoilers)

Though this game was launched a year earlier, its story starts off right after
The Old Blood ends. After B. J. Blaskowicz returns to the Allies with the
location of General Deathshead's secret hideout, they mount a massive attack on
that island fortress.

The attack is a disaster, because the compound is defended by weird dieselpunk
jet fighters and robots of all sizes, as well as the usual complement of human
soldiers. Blazko is among the soldiers that make it to the shore, and his unit
makes significant progress into the fortress before they end up falling in a
locked chamber where Deathshead and a bunch of supersoldiers capture them.

There's a very unpleasant sequence here as the game forces the player to choose
who among the two allied NPCs it had been hyping up survive. Wing
Commander Fergus Reid, a veteran and long-time friend of Blazko, or private
Wyatt, a fresh-faced 18-year old recruit who looks up to him? The one who
doesn't survive has his brain extracted by Deathshead, who leaves the rest of
the soldiers to die in a deathtrap.

They manage to escape, but in the ensuing explosion Blazko gets hit in the head
by a large piece of shrapnel, losing most of his motor function and ability to
interact with the world. He washes ashore somewhere in Poland, and since no one
knows who he is, gets sent to an asylum where he spends the next 14 years.

A Nazi attack on the asylum in 1960 gives him the impulse he needs to complete
his recovery, and the first actual level of the game is escaping that situation
with Anna, the other survivor of the place.

They reach Anna's grandparents, where Blazko learns that the Nazis won the war
in 1948, and that as far as everyone knows the last members of the resistance
had been captured and sent to an "inescapable" prison in Berlin.

The rest of the game is about freeing these prisoners, rejoining with the
remains of the resistance, and building it back up through a series of daring
heists that culminate with capturing a super-submarine, recovering its nuclear
launch codes from a Nazi _moonbase_, and then using it to mount another attack
on Deathshead's fortress.

This time Blazko manages to kill the asshole, despite having to face a giant
robot controlled by the unwilling brain of the ally who died all the way back in
the prologue. The game ends with B. J., too wounded to continue, gives his
allies the all-clear to launch the nuke that will destroy this fortress for
good.

## The Guns

The vast majority of the guns here are, again, captured Nazi hardware. And
those, in turn, are "new and improved" versions of the guns we saw in The Old
Blood.

### Pistols

#### Pistol Model 1960

A direct descendant of the 1946 model, this one has a more futuristic look, a
double-stacked 20-round magazine, and the ability to fire 3-round bursts. It
still takes the same cinematic silencer. As before, it adds -1 to Bulk, makes
the gun cinematically silent, and also makes it only able to fire in semi-auto
mode (RoF 3).

| TL | Weapon      | Damage  | Acc | Range    | Weight      | RoF | Shots   | ST | Bulk | Rcl |
|:--:|:-----------:|:-------:|:---:|:--------:|:-----------:|:---:|:-------:|:--:|:----:|:----|
| 8  | Pistol 1960 | 2d+2 pi | 2   | 160/1800 | 1.4kg/0.5kg | 9   | 20+1(3) | 10 | -2   | 2   |

####

[1]:
