---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 5, Part 2"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

Previously on Hell's Rebels, the PCs discovered the names of the five families
that make up the Board of Governors. Now they must get the Board back together
by finding the current descendants of those lineages, and then convince it to
ratify Jilia Bailinus as Mayor so she can forbid Cheliax from invading!

## Leverage Over Law

This part of the adventure is pretty freeform. The order in which the party
tracks down the board members is flexible, and there is no single way to
convince most of them to cooperate. It could be done entirely through role
playing without a single combat, if the GM is so inclined.

The names of the five families who make up the Board are: Delronge,
Mayhart, Solstine, Tanessen, and Urvis. Each of them presents the group with two
challenges: finding the current "head" of the family, and convincing them to
ratify Jilia Bailinus (or whoever their preferred candidate is, if she's
unavailable on account of being dead).

The families in question were all prominent noble lineages at the time of the
contract's signing, but some of them are quite hard to find in the present
day. Fortunately we still have enough extant members for a full Board (or else
we wouldn't have an adventure).

### Delronge

This one is very easy to find, as it's still a prominent Kintargo noble
family. Its current head is Archbaroness Melodia Delronge. Unfortunately, this
is one if the noble houses that was a staunch Thrune supporter, and they remain
so.

Melodia's current public stance is that this is one of Kintargo's many
"rebellious phases", and that the main branch of House Thrune will soon arrive
to return things to normal after they're done with the "current unpleasantness"
in the heartland.

The baroness is happy to join the Board, but she refuses to ratify Jilia and
instead wants a candidate who's in tight with the Chelish government. This, of
course, is the exact opposite of what the PCs want. Fortunately, like all
wealthy fascist supporters, she's very susceptible to bribery. Bribes that match
her personal interests of hunting and horse breeding/racing are twice as
effective. Pay her enough and she will be "at peace" with voting for Bainilus.

### Mayhart

The Mayhart family used to own several silver mines in Southern Ravounel at the
time of the civil war, but they had lost them all by the time Thrune took the
country. Board membership was their last claim to fame, but when the old board
was dissolved they faded into obscurity.

Today there is one last heir to the Mayhart line remaining: Carliss Mayhart, who
lives in Villegre and works as a market guard. Unfortunately, he was arrested
for murder of another minor aristocrat before the campaign began.

The victim is one Lerish Aeldervenk, scion of a family that had a historic
rivalry with the Mayharts. Rumor has it that Mayhart challenged Lerish to an
illegal midnight duel on Bleakbridge, which ended with Lerish falling into the
river. No one ever found the body, but the Aldervenks used their influence to
get Mayhart arrested for murder anyway. They had been pushing for execution but
had to stop and lay low when Barzilai took over. So Mayhart has been in Kintargo
Keep this whole time. It's even possible the PCs met him before while they
invaded the place, or if they were imprisoned there themselves.

While Mayhart is a convicted criminal, all of his rights and privileges are
suspended, including the right to be a board member. This being infernal magic,
the legalities are very important. He will gladly vote to ratify Jilia, but they
have to clear his name.

Fortunately Lerish isn't actually dead. Mayhart did challenge him to a duel, but
Lerish faked his own death by jumping off the bridge and swimming away using a
magical helmet that let him breathe underwater. He intended to frame Mayhart,
get him executed, and then be "miraculously found alive" later. Of course, when
Thrune took over the execution plans got put on hold and he's been hiding out in
his family home ever since.

His mother, Lady Jenna, is in on the whole thing but is having serious regrets
about it now. The PCs should be able to convince her to come clean using
diplomacy or intimidation. If they're nice about it, she will give them that
water-breathing helmet in exchange for them leaving her family name out of the
public's ears.

### Solstine

The Solstine family lost some of their fortune after the dissolution of the
board and retreated both from politics and from the aristocratic life. They live
comfortably in Redroof now. Their matriarch, 85-year old Raenna Solstine,
remembers her father's role as a board member, and is no supporter of
Thrune. However, she also has a strong distaste for the Silver Ravens ever since
her two grandchildren died fighting in their name during the rebellion.

It's up to the GM whether the Solstine boys were active members of the Ravens or
just enthusiastic supporters, but in either case they died offscreen and their
grandmother is still grieving. Trying to "compensate" her for the loss of her
grandchildren will just enrage the old matron. Honest compassion will take the
PCs much further, and allow to convince her to ratify Bainilus in order to
prevent House Thrune from invading and killing more young people.

### Tanessen

This is another current noble house, so it's very easy to find. It also used to
be one of Thrune's supporters, but its head Geoff Tanessen is having second
thoughts after seeing how bad Barzilai was for the city and its economy. So
yeah, he's in team Bolsoregrets now.

Unfortunately Geoff is a bit wary to make his change of heart known, because
most of his social circles are still very pro-Thrune and his twin sons in
particular are fanatical Thrunists. When invited to the Board he agrees, but
says he doubts Jilia would make a popular choice since she was "weak"
before. He agrees to ratify her anyway if the PCs promise him Kintargo won't
become a "state of expatriates and rebels", and if its current government can
make a new and sizable trade agreement to show they are committed to the
economy. That would give him a good excuse to publicly change his position.

The PCs will have a chance to satisfy his request in one of the Part 3 missions.

### Urvis

This one inverts the formula we saw so far. It's very hard to find, but
trivially easy to convince.

Like the others, House Urvis used to be a prominent noble family. Unlike the
others, it's extinct.

At the tail end of the Chelish Civil War, nearly every member of the family died
of a mysterious illness. Rumor has it that House Thrune itself engineered this
fate. Guess Queen Ab must have been convinced she wouldn't need her escape
clause. A lot of information about this family has been redacted, but the
classified records the PCs recovered from various places last adventure have
the necessary clues.

The sole survivor of that plague was the family matriarch, Alveda Urvis. To
prevent her family holdings from reverting to House Thrune upon her death, she
bequeathed the family estate and all its titles, rights, and privileges to her
halfling caretaker Peletera Taltallow.

When Alveda died, a traitorous lawyer handed the material goods to House Thrune
anyway and sold Peletera into slavery. He didn't care to transfer the
"privileges", however, so the right to sit on the board now belongs to the
Talltallow line.

And our good friend Laria Longroad happens to be Peletera's granddaughter!
Remember her from adventure 1? There's every chance she remained an important
NPC all through the campaign, since she has a lot of connections but and usually
stays away from the front line.

### Ratifying the Mayor

The ceremony to ratify a mayor is described in the Kintargo Contract. You need a
fully staffed Board, and you need at least 3 out of 5 "Yes" votes. You then need
at least twelve witnesses, though the ceremony itself doesn't have to be
public.

Laria's and Mayhart's votes are pretty much already in the bag. The easiest
third vote to get is Solstine's - all you need is some genuine empathy for her
suffering. You can succeed (and receive the story reward) with just these, but
personally I would feel inclined to get a "perfect score" here. If nothing else
it prevents problems from resentful board members in the future.

As soon as Mayor Jilia is ratified, she sends a letter to the Chelish capital of
Egorian forbidding the empire from sending troops to Ravounel as per the terms
of the Kintargo contract. After paying Oddie through the nose for an extra copy
and a period of frantic reading, Queen Abrogail II sends a response agreeing to
the terms and making a ton of veiled threats. War averted, mission accomplished!

## Next time in Let's Read Hell's Rebels!

Can't have a Hell's Rebels volume without a whole lot of miscellaneous missions
to throw at your players!
