---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 06, Part 2"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - lets-read
    - gurps
    - hells-rebels
---

In our last installment, the PCs hopefully managed to prevent a grisly murder
and to negotiate a treaty that gets Cheliax off Ravounel's back for the
foreseeable future. However, they return to find Barzilai is still giving them
trouble even while he's being poked by tridents down in Hell.

When he was killed in Adventure Four, the Soul Anchor sent his soul straight to
Hell and turned him into a bone devil, and Mephistopheles immediately imprisoned
him so that the contractually agreed period of torture could begin. When the PCs
liberated the duchy in Adventure Five, though, it fulfilled one of his
contract's clauses and allowed him to begin the transformation
immediately. While the full transformation will take a long time, his influence
over the land can already be felt. In other words, Kintargo is haunted.

## Part 2: The Haunting of Kintargo

Remember the rebellion mini-game from Adventure Four? There was open warfare in
the streets and the PCs needed to take on "mini-bosses" for each of the city's
districts in order to capture that district and reduce Thrune's power over the
city. Fun times, yeah? You really felt you made a difference when you finally
took the last district and liberated the city.

Well, guess what, now you get to do it all over again with bigger numbers! The
long and short of it is that Barzilai's ongoing transformation has given him a
measure of influence over Kintargo. Every district of the city is haunted by a
different aspect of his awful personality. The PCs must investigate each one and
find a way to exorcise the manifestation, or his influence will keep growing.

Barzilai's influence over each district can be measured as "weak", "moderate" or
"strong". Each level gives increasing bonuses to lawful evil outsiders in the
district - even "weak". Starting value is moderate, but each success in the
talks on part 1 can lower starting influence to "weak" in certain
districts. Failure will instead raise it to "strong".

Each week in which the city remains haunted, Barzilai can increase his influence
in one random district by one step, if it was at least at "weak" before. This
means resolved hauntings don't come back, which is good. If influence in the
chosen district was already at "Strong", he gains 1 "Soul Point" instead. This
is a custom mechanic that will affect how hard the final boss fight is.

Every time the PCs resolve a haunting, Barzilai's spirit lashes out and they get
a vision about the Soul Anchor - that's how they learn his heart is there, and
how to get to the place.

### The Hounds of Old Kintargo

This one's simple: four massive armored hellhounds that symbolize Barzilai's
need to control others. They're the size of horses and look emaciated to the
point of starvation. This doesn't cause them ill effects, but instead projects
an aura of hunger that damages and penalizes nearby enemies.

The hounds have a tendency to go after those who defied Barzilai when he was
alive, which means they'll zero in on the PCs as soon as they enter Old
Kintargo. To resolve the haunt and free the district, they simply need to kill
all four hounds.

### Whispers on the Silver Span

This affects the districts of Redroof and Yolubilis Harbor, which are linked by
the Silver Span bridge. The haunt here is a "proper" haunt, and solving it
requires more investigation than combat. It's powered by Barzilai's disdain of
commoners.

The districts and the bridge are literally haunted, giving everyone who lives
there a constant feeling of unease and causing strange sounds and lights to
often be seen. People venturing our of their houses at night might encounter a
floating ghost head whose mind-controlling whispers force victims to commit
suicide, usually by jumping from the Silver Span.

These are the area's "minor" haunts. To free it, the PCs must find their source,
a much more powerful haunt that might reveal itself on the bridge when the PCs
have successfully dealt with enough of the minor ones. This takes the form of a
giant Barzilai head who keeps shouting and casting _weird_ every round until
defeated.

Both the minor and major haunts have an HP pool that can only be reduced by
"positive energy" damage, from stuff like Turn Undead or directed healing
spells. To free the affected districts, the PCs must reduce the big haunt's HP
to 0, which destroys it forever. It has 76 HP, but a single Heal spell should
still take care of it. The difficulty here lies in learning about its existence
and figuring out how to make it manifest.

### The Wailing Woman

This affects the Greens, Kintargo's noble residential district, and for once it
has nothing to do with Barzilai. Instead, the culprit is the witch Tiarise
Izoni, who the PCs likely killed in Adventure Four. As that adventure mentioned,
she had performed a ritual that would turn her into a powerful undead monster
when she died. And here she is now, as something called a "nemhain". This seems
to be a stronger, frost-themed banshee.

Tiarise manifests at night, and loudly curses the PCs in several profane
languages. To locate her, the PCs must only be in the district at night and
follow the sounds.

She's located in the same Hall of Records where the PCs first defeated her, and
has managed to summon a bunch of starvation-themed ghosts as minions. Together
they make for a beefy boss fight, and keep coming back every 1d4 days when
destroyed until the PCs find their anchor: the frost-rimmed bones of the witch's
old familiar. The bones only exist at night and are invisible even so, with only
the layer of frost acting as an indication of their position. They're fairly
tough and release a wave of negative energy each time they're damaged, so the
PCs should likely either destroy all the undead before breaking the bones, or
focus fire on them to destroy them as quickly as possible. Once this happens,
Tiarise is permanently destroyed and the region is free.

### A Hunter Prowls the Streets

The haunt of Temple Hill is a layer of gloomy clouds hanging over the district,
borne of Barzilai's devil-worship. It not only causes the usual haunt unease,
but also makes people more prone to having negative emotions. Before the PCs can
handle this haunt, they must deal with the opportunistic creature helping keep
it in place. The book calls it a popobala, and it's some sort of fiendish bat
creature that feeds on negative emotions and can cast a bunch of mind-affecting
spells.

The creature, named Sulkimy, is using its powers to make the district's
inhabitants even surlier and angrier, and when the PCs arrive to investigate
he'll dominate a local dwarf artisan and have her stir up a mob against the PCs
using some fake pretext or another. The PCs need to realize what's really
happening, track the creature to its lair, and face it in combat.

Once the bat is dead, the PCs can use standard weather control spells to
disperse the clouds, thus freeing the district.

### The Hell-Prison

Barzilai's love of torture has brought a tiny slice of Hell to Castle
District. This takes the form of a miniature prison, which is the physical focus
for a haunt. The prison only exists in the Ethereal plane, but will manifest
physically when Barzilai's influence is Strong in the district, or when the PCs
find its location in the Ethereal.

Once manifested, the haunt uses several mind-affecting spells to draw victims
closer and "swallow" them, and when it has nine victims inside it will transport
them to Hell. Simply depleting the haunt's HP will only disable it for a day. To
permanently destroy it, the PCs must either destroy the physical prison (which
is tough and summons barbed devil guardians when hit), cast spells that either
sever its planar connection or banish it, or cast the _freedom_ spell. The
latter is so antithetical to the prison it will destroy it instantly.

Any victims transported to Hell remain there after the prison is destroyed. At
the GM's discretion, the PCs might get a chance to rescue them in the final part
of the adventure.

## Part 2 Denouement

As mentioned above, solving each haunt gives PCs fragmentary visions about the
Soul Anchor. Once the last one is exorcised, the PCs will learn how to get to
the Soul Anchor, and will see that Barzilai's heart is there. Together with all
the information they've been collecting on his master plan since Adventure Four,
this should give them a pretty good idea of what his whole master plan is, and
how to stop it. We're into the endgame now, so it's time to get that heart, head
to Hell, and shove it down Barzilai's throat.
