---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 04, Part 3"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

We're firmly in the wrap-up stage now. If you're here, the PCs have succeeded at
dismantling the powerful magical defenses of the Temple of Asmodeus and
disrupted a dire summoning ritual that was Barzilai Thrune's last attempt at
squashing the Silver Raven rebellion. They made it out with a literal dragon's
hoard worth of loot and if they were particularly skilled they might even have
managed to kill Thrune himself during the raid! In this post, we'll see what all
of that means for the rebellion.

## Strategic and Campaign Implications

As far as the rebellion is concerned, it has achieved its major goal. All of the
Thrune leadership has been neutralized one way or the other, ceding control of
not just Kintargo but the entire province of Ravounel.

The next few days immediately after the PC's victory at the temple are a flurry
of activity as the former rebel organization sets itself up as the new
government. If Jilia Bailinus has been rescued and revived (a likely outcome),
then she's immediately reinstated as Lord Mayor. Otherwise the job goes to a
sympatethic noble or priestly NPC - the players should have some input on who
gets the job.

The new mayor will have several difficult issues to solve in the medium term,
but for now it's time to celebrate!

## The Silver Span Celebration

All of the PC's heroics quickly become common knowledge, now that there is no
more need for secrecy on their part. Soon after they recover from the temple
raid, they and their allies are invited to a huge party in their honor. It takes
place on Bleakbridge - the same spot where the PCs busted a blockade early in
the adventure.

The place is quite crowded now. A wooden stage has been erected right in the
middle of the bridge, where a whole bunch of statues are covered with cloth
awaiting for their unveiling. The PCs, every single member of the Silver Ravens,
and anyone else whom they had significant interactions with will be at the
party.

Some time after the party gets going, the mayor calls the PCs up to the stage,
makes a speech renaming the bridge from Bleakbridge to the Silver Span, and
unveils the statues. These represent all the PCs, plus any NPCs who were
especially important to the rebellion's success at the group's discretion. These
are going to be installed along the Silver Span, as an eternal reminder of their
heroic deeds.

The PCs themselves are then presented with silver Keys to the City! The keys are
worth quite a bit of money, but the real prize here is the major reputation
boost that comes with being recognized as an official hero. That's a hefty bonus
to gather information or perform for money in the city, as well as a permanent
10% discount on all Kintargan shops that don't have reason to actively hate the
characters.

Before we can close the curtains on this adventure, however, there is the small
matter of the retributive strike.

## From Hell's Heart

... I stab at thee! That's a particularly appropriate quote here.

You see, right after the PCs receive those keys, the remnants of the Thrune
faction teleport in and try to kill the PCs. I don't think they can take the
province back at this point - this is simply done out of spite.

Who the attackers are depend on what exactly happened so far. From the worst
case to the best one, we have:

- **Barzilai on a Fucking Dragon**: If both Thrune and the dragon Rivozair are
  still alive, they both show up, with Thrune riding the dragon. This happens
  even if Rivozair fled the city after being defeated by the PCs in their
  previous confrontation.

- **Barzilai OR a Fucking Dragon**: if either one of the pair is dead, the other
  still attacks. Rivozair shows up alone; Thrune appears accompanied by four
  bone devils.

- **The Dregs**: If both main baddies are dead, the GM should build a CR 13
  encounter with any secondary villains who managed to escape death over the
  course of the adventure, focusing on those the players loved to hate the
  most. If there are not enough to hit CR 13 on their own, fill the encounter
  with appropriate minions.

- **No One!**: Particularly thorough groups might have not left anyone alive to
  attempt revenge! The chance of this happening is quite low, as there are a lot
  of named villains here and many of them will make an effort to escape when
  first fought. But if this does happen, just skip this battle altogether.

If anyone shows up at all, they fight to the death this time around regardless
of their previous cowardice. This encounter is the "main event", and it's
accompanied by a "sideshow" in the form of a bunch of loyalist dottari and minor
devils who arrive more conventionally and try to slaughter the crowd. These keep
the rest of the NPC Silver Ravens occupied, and are handled as series of
Security checks to prevent civilian deaths.

Thrune remains as hard to kill as ever, but this time the PCs are fully rested
and have no other encounters to worry about. And with all those NPCs present,
someone is bound to have a handy spell to finish him off if the PCs don't have
one of their own.

### Victory Tally

After this fight is over, we finally get to tally the party's XP award for
liberating Kintargo. This depends entirely on how many inhabitants have survived
the whole ordeal.

The city starts the game with 11900 inhabitants, according to its stat sheet in
the Player's Guide. The GM is supposed to keep track of this number from the
start of the campaign until now. There are several events in the strategic layer
(Thrune reprisals, mostly) that kill a number of innocents and reduce this
number. Deaths of innocents during the "tactical adventuring" portions also
reduce the number - for example, when they fail to rescue a sacrifice victim or
when the Ruby Masquerade trap is sprung.

If the city has at least 9000 surviving inhabitants at the end of this last
party, the game considers the rebellion an Unmitigated Success. 7500 or more
survivors makes for a Grim Success, and less than that is a pyrrhic victory
marked by Tragic Loss. I think it's quite hard to end up with less than 9000
citizens unless the group fails to prevent the Ruby Masquerade massacre and
really slacks off during the "hot war" portion of this adventure.

## The Chelish Crux

This device, apparently a Hellraiser-style puzzle box, is also the plot coupon I
mentioned earlier. It sits inside Barzilai Thrune's chest cavity - he replaced
his heart with it back during adventure 2. The book mentions that retrieving
this thing from Thrune's corpse and opening it up are vital steps to proceed
with the remaining two adventures in the campaign.

## What Happens Next

First of all, nothing _has_ to happen from this point on. This is an excellent
stopping point for the campaign if the GM doesn't feel like spending money on
the last two volumes. Just remove the Crux, and say that Barzilai has lost his
chance to become a genius loci by dying. He's in Hell forever. Campaign
complete, mission accomplished, let's leave nation-building to the government
and retire as glorious heroes.

If you do want to continue playing Hell's Rebels, though, then the Crux still
exists and the situation is the following:

Kintargo is free for now, and Cheliax is busy fighting the Glorious Reclamation
in its heartland, but that situation won't last much longer. Cheliax will
eventually send an army to retake the city, which won't be able to hold against
an all-out military assault. The key to solving that problem happens to be
inside the Chelish Crux, and we'll deal with that in the next adventure.

Barzilai himself isn't exactly out of the picture either. Even dead, he's still
on track to become a genius loci, and solving the Cheliax issue will actually
make that process much faster. Dealing with him once and for all is the subject
of the last adventure in the campaign.
