---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 05, Part 3"
---

This third part of the adventure is the already familiar set of miscellaneous
missions for the volume. It can happen either right after Part 2 (in which the
PCs try to get the Board of Governors back together to ratify the mayor), or it
could happen afterwards.

Most of these have a single unifying theme: uniting Ravounel. The Kintargo
Contract works almost like a constitution in the way in which it defines the
province. It divides it into five administrative regions, and specifies that the
city of Kintargo must sign a treaty of alliance with the "leader" of that region
for it to count as part of the province. The definition of leader here is pretty
vague, and fits any individual who is generally recognized as important and
influential by most inhabitants of that region.

This is good because none of these regions are the neatly administered areas the
contract expects them to be. The PCs need to go to each one, find someone who
can fit the definition of regional leader, and get them to sign a treaty. Each
of these trips is presented as a different mission. Each region that doesn't
sign a treaty will _not count as a part of Ravounel_ when House Thrune comes
calling.

I'll cover the regions first, and then talk about the two missions that aren't
related to them. As usual these missions can be undertaken in any order and can
happen concurrently with the work of finding the Board of Governors.

## Ravounel Isles

By far the simplest signature to acquire if the PCs successfully acquired Vyre's
support back in Adventure 3. They just need to visit their good friend
~~Morticia Addams~~ Manticce Kaleekii and ask her to sign the treaty.

## North Plains

This is the area of rolling hills and plains that makes up much of northern
Ravounel. It has a lot of small rural villages but no formal center of
administration or official regional leadership. The closest thing to both are
the slightly larger village of Cypress Point and its resident priestess of
Desna, who is well-known and respected throughout the region. The priestess,
Xerelilah, will gladly sign the treaty on behalf of the region without asking
for anything in return. She also has an optional sidequest for the PCs.

In the North Plains there is an ancient ziggurat made of solid shadow that
sprung fully-formed from the soil in pre-historic times. It's the only structure
of its type in Ravounel, but there's a lot more of them in neighboring Nidal,
the nation whose state religion worships the shadow-and-torture god
Zon-Kuthon. Anyway, it appears Thrune actually let a Nidalese contingent occupy
the ziggurat, and Xerelilah is concerned that this might become a beachhead for
a Nidalese invasion. After all, Nidal isn't bound by any contracts.

She asks the party to go to the ziggurat and either secure a formal agreement
from its inhabitants that promises Nidal will not invade, or perform a show of
force that will discourage it from doing so.

Turns out the "contingent" is a married shadow giant couple who will attack
intruders on sight and fight to the death, so I guess show of force it
is. There's also a couple of shadow-based traps left behind by the previous
occupant, an umbral dragon that was driven away by Nidal around 80 years
ago. The giants don't trigger those because they fit their exclusion criteria
("living shadow creature"). The PCs definitely will, however.

One of the things the traps do is alert the dragon, who will become curious
enough to investigate via long-range shadow teleport. The PCs will meet him on
the way out after beating the giants. This umbral dragon is atypical - not only
is it not evil, it's actually rather personable. He just wants to have a nice
chat with the PCs and ask about what they just did, and will be pretty happy and
thankful to recover one of his old lairs. Unless the PCs decide to start a
fight, they can leave here in peace and with a new ally who owes them a favor.

## Coastal Waters

Getting this signature is easy. The PCs just have to make a brief trip to
Acisazi and politely ask the elderly druid Athannah, who already hero-worships
them because of Adventure 3. She will sign right away, but also has a side quest
for the PCs.

Even though this mission is not necessary to get the signature, it's still kinda
necessary because it has to do with stopping a "plague" of deadly whirlpools
that have been popping up off the coast and sinking trade ships. This is the
sort of thing the people of Kintargo expect the Silver Ravens to solve, and if
they take too long their reputation will take a hit. The sea elves spotted the
monster responsible and can guide the PCs to its underwater lair. Yay, another
underwater dungeon.

The opposition here is actually quite similar to the one from the Lucky Bones,
but upgraded with class levels. So instead of a troop of plain skum you get a
troop of skum _rangers_, and instead of a drowning devil you get a drowning
devil _sorcerer_. They're the handlers of the monster that causes the
whirlpools, a giant carnivorous aquatic bug called a "charybdis" (har har).

## Ravounel Forest

This is the hardest signature to get by far. Common knowledge about Ravounel
Forest says it's a dangerous wilderness full of monsters, which of course means
there's at least two significant native settlements in here and one of their
leaders needs to sign the treaty.

The forest is frequently assailed by storms, giving rise to rumors that a cult
of Rovagug hides there. Rovagug is the most Chaotic Evil deity in the whole
setting, worse than even demon lords. His followers can control the
weather. Other rumors also say the forest is inhabited by a group of monstrous
fey creatures who kill anyone they see.

The truth is more complex, and wise characters might be able to spot some clues
before going in. The forest is home to a small tribe of strix, sapient winged
humanoids that share several traits with owls. About 200 years go, a trio of
hags moved in, and they've been waging a constant low-level war with the strix
for control of the forest. They're the main reason the tribe is small, and yes,
they do worship Rovagug.

Strix are typically paranoid and isolationist, and can hold grudges even more
intensely than dwarves, but this particular group has grown desperate enough
that they've become more open-minded and willing to seek outside help. They have
a sentai team of 5 skilled rangers and warriors, including the chieftain, and 54
non-combatants.

Both sides have enough surveillance on the forest that they will more or less
immediately know the PCs have entered it. The strix sentai team will attempt to
contact and ask them for help. The hags will use illusions to pose as helpless
dryads oppressed by the evil owl-women. Each side will try to recruit the PCs to
kill the other.

The correct move here is to back the strix and kill the hags. The chieftain will
sign the treaty once that's done and the PCs agree to let the tribe keep their
autonomy. The hags are super evil lying liars who lie and will turn on the PCs
instead of signing anything, so helping them means giving on up the Forest.

The storm hag trio makes for one of the harder fights in the module, because
they can cast _forcecage_ at will and are smart enough to target casters
first. The strix sentai will tag along the PCs to help, and if the PCs have no
way of neutralizing those cages their players might find themselves temporarily
controlling the strix.

## Other Missions

### Greenbriar Fetters

This is the name of an "independent" gang of slavers who secretly arrived in
Kintargo. They only sell to Chelish nobles in the capital, but are not official
Chelish military themselves, so they can get around the contract's
prohibitions.

They've decided that since Kintargo has gone independent, it's now fair
game. The gang intends to capture as many people as they can and run away on an
allied smuggler ship that's going to dock here in a couple of months. They come
into the notice of the PCs when they kidnap one of their NPC allies. This should
probably be someone important to the story, maybe someone they need to rescue in
order to secure a board member's vote. I suggest one of Geoff Tanessen's sons
for parties who don't really feel like negotiating trade deals to satisfy him,
or Laria Longroad for cruel GMs.

The mission's goal is to track the slavers down and end them. It's narrative
purpose is to make the PCs feel badass, because tracking down the Fetters is not
hard at all and while they're not exactly pushovers they're also a fair bit
weaker than the PCs and there's not a lot of them.

### They Did Not Go Gently

First it was the tooth fairies in Adventure 1. Then it was the maniac with a
possessed knife in Adventure 2. In each of these serial killer plots, rumors
went around that the fabled Temple Hill Slasher (a Jack the Ripper figure) had
returned, despite being found out and executed more than a century ago.

In this _third_ serial killer plot, the Fabled Temple Hill Slasher has returned
despite being found out and executed more than a century ago. The explanation
for this has to do with the Soul Anchor, an artifact that sits in the Underdark
beneath Kintargo. People who touch it can preserve their memories and
personalities after death, which doesn't usually happen in this setting. This is
exactly what Professor Mangvhune, the Slasher, did before he was found
out. Barzilai also used the Soul Anchor as part of his ritual - it's where his
heart is. The artifact can also sometimes emit "flares" that can anchor people
at a distance.

The Slasher's soul was hurled to the Abyss, where he reformed as a babau demon
and proceeded to become a faithful worshiper of the demon lord of murder. When
Barzilai died he got curious and came back to Kintargo with a posse of cambion
followers. The Slasher occupied his old secret lair in an abandoned wing of the
Alabaster Academy, which had never been discovered, and set out on another
killing spree.

The first two victims are randos he kills as a test. From that point on he
begins to explicitly challenge the Ravens, targeting people who are close to
them and leaving their bodies to be found as grisly displays. Each victim is
a dearer friend than the last, and left in a more shocking state.

The book expects two such murders to happpen before the party can make headway
into figuring out the slasher, and recommends the GM step up the timetable to
ensure this if the PCs are _too_ efficient. I suggest disregarding this advice
and letting them enjoy the win if they figure out it's the Slasher immediately.

Once that happens tracking him down is very easy. His identity is known, and
it's the reason why the university wing where his office was is
abandoned. There's a secret passage in the office that has seen enough use by
those cambions that it doesn't require a roll to find. That leads to a
teleportation circle that will drop PCs in his secret lair. There's a lot of
horrible stuff here both ancient and new, including a haunted skeleton that can
cause PCs to be exposed to the Soul Anchor. This doesn't have any immediate
effects - it just ensures the PC will retain their memories when they die their
final death, and possibly get fast-tracked to outsider status in their afterlife
of choice.

Mangvhune wants to confront the PCs in his secret lair, because that's
theatrical and because it's full of deadly traps. He wants to kill them to get
them out of the way of his planned eternal murder spree. He's a babau with a
bunch of assassin levels, so the priority here is preventing him from hiding and
ambushing the PCs with death attacks.

There's a whole bunch of notes he made on the Soul Anchor back when he was
alive, and the narrative purpose of this mission seems to be to get them into
the PC's hands. This will probably be their first hint that the Anchor even
exists, and it's going to be much more important in Adventure 6.

If you intend to end the campaign in this volume, you can remove the Slasher
mission entirely, as well as any mention of the Soul Anchor.
