---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels Adventure 3, Part 3"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - dnd
    - gurps
---

Here we come to the final part of our Let's Read of the third Hell's Rebels
adventure, "Dance of the Damned". With the "regional support" missions complete,
the Rebellion's stats can grow to their maximum values. We're almost at the
point where things get real serious in Kintargo.

But first, a party!

## Part 5: The Ruby Masquerade

Barzilai Thrune has been organizing a grand masquerade ball to be hosted at the
Opera House ever since the start of this adventure. He advertises it as a way to
reconcile with his critics and to show everything is fine in Kintargo, but of
course it's a dastardly trap. After the PCs close the Menador Gap he steps up
his time table and announces a date for the event.

His plan is to use a troop of dottari and disguised devils to massacre the
ball's attendants during its unmasking ceremony, and doctor the evidence to
blame the Silver Ravens. This will give him an official excuse to begin hunting
them down in earnest.

Barzilai sends invitations to every noble or other prominent citizen he knows
does not support him. He's not stupid enough to believe the PCs would attend if
he invited them directly, so he makes invitations relatively easy to acquire by
other means as well.

It's at this point that the private investigator Tayacet Tiora makes contact
with the PCs. Barzilai had hired her to look into the Silver Ravens, and it's
even possible they ran into her in previous adventures if the GM decided to use
that scene. This time, she's found out enough to become convinced the PCs are in
the right, and she comes to warn them that the Masquerade is a trap. Her
recommendation is for the PCs to not attend, but she promises to help if they
insist.

Simply not going is certainly an option. It ensures the safety of the PCs but
lets the trap spring on the innocent guests unopposed. The book also
contemplates the possibility that the PCs will want to break into the Opera
House early, which is actually a good call. The same security forces will be
present and they will be patrolling more aggresively, but there will be no
bystanders. The PCs would miss out on a few extra hob-nobbing opportunities but
would be in a much better tactical position.

The rest of the adventure assumes the PCs do attend, however. It should be
fairly easy to get invitations for the whole party plus any allies they wish to
take. Tiora will also attend in this case, and be ready to help if necessary.

The Masquerade starts at 9 PM, and whatever day is most convenient for the
GM. The PCs should have ample time to prepare for this one, growing the
rebellion and aiming their NPC teams at the Opera House to provide
information. It's even possible to plant an infiltrated saboteur among the
guards. With good rolls they should have a pretty good idea of the security
inside the place, and an extra ally on the inside.

### Party Mechanics

The actual ball is a bit of a skill challenge in the same vein as the Vyre
banquet. There's an official dress code: outfits should include the color red,
everyone must wear a mask, and both should be fancy. Fortunately they can pass
anything up to medium armor and shields as part of the costume, but it's
definitely worth it to have it adorned and to splurge on extravagant
masks. These give bonuses to social skills during the event.

Just like we had Banquet Points in Vyre, here we have Masque Points. PCs start
with an amount between 4 and 16 depending on how fancy their costumes are. NPC
allies they bring with them also affect this total. The ball is split into
half-hour segments, and each PC can perform one of several available actions
during this span of time. Some of these actions cost Masque Points, some can be
used to acquire more with good skill rolls.

Unless the PCs have been making an effort to ingratiate themselves with the
noble houses during "strategic" play, this is their last real chance to do so
before things heat up. The Kintargo-aligned house heads should all be here, so
the party's socialites can identify them and chat them up. Having to do this now
does add a layer of complication to the procedures, which is why I like the idea
of introducing this element early in the campaign instead and let players make
their own interaction opportunities.

### Opera House Layout and Security

The Opera House has three floors and an extensive basement. The main seating
areas had all of their seat removed to host the ball. Most guests stay on the
ground floor, but the nobles gravitate towards the second floor balcony because
they like to look down on commoners.

The first two floors have a lot of backstage areas off to the sides, and the
third floor and basement are all "backstage". Many of these areas were converted
in living spaces for Barzilai and his staff. All backstage areas are off-limits
to party guests, so PCs need to be sneaky when exploring them.

There are a total of 22 dottari in the house, half of which attend to the guests
while wearing smiley masks. The other half stands in reserve, waiting for the
trap to spring. The dottari here use the same stats as the Menador soldiers,
with slightly different gear. This means the PCs should be able to handle small
groups of them just fine - the challenge is doing so without raising an alarm.

There is also a troop of devils in here: two bone, six bearded, and a single
erinyes. One of the bone devils, Crizmerkis, has a few class levels on him and
is wearing an illusory disguise to look like Barzilai. The real Thrune has
relocated to the temple of Asmodeus, and does not appear in this adventure. The
other bone devil is in the orchestra pit, using his illusion magic to provide
the music for the ball. The remaining monsters are scattered through several
side rooms.

One of the rooms also contains suspended cages for Barzilai's pet cockatrices,
which can be released at the press of a switch. Unless the PCs or an ally break
the switch, these creatures will be released when the trap is sprung.

Finally, there are a bunch of secret rooms in a sub-basement that used to belong
to the original Silver Ravens. Barzilai is using them to stash his treasures and
house his "prize" henchthings. Former Mayor Jilia Bailinus sleeps here as a
vampire and might be called to fight the PCs. The long-missing singer Shensen is
also here as a statue.

There are a couple of additional secret chambers Thrune's lackeys haven't been
able to find, and which contain valuable Silver Ravens stuff. This includes the
crypts for the original Ravens, which confirm their fates and the fact that
Jackdaw, the last remaining member, might still be alive. And it also includes
the musical score for the Song of Silver, a potent ritual that will greatly help
the PCs in the climax of the rebellion.

Using rebellion actions the PCs can arm themselves with plenty of information
before going in: a Covert Action can give them the map to the whole building,
even the secret-secret chambers with a good enough roll. And a Sabotage action
can place an infiltrator among the dottari. Once the PCs link up with the
infiltrator during the party, they can learn the composition and location of the
place's entire security detail, devils included. The saboteur can also break the
cockatrice release switch.

There are several rooms that are noted as being rarely visited by both guests
and patrols, which makes them perfect places to hide bodies. So yup, time to
Assassin's Creed it up.

### "Delving" the Masquerade

I would say those covert actions are so vital that the GM should push for them
to happen if the players have been neglecting that aspect of the game. The PCs
are on the clock here and every little advantage helps.

As mentioned above, the party starts at 9PM. At 10PM, they have a special "Dance
of the Damned" event that takes up half an hour. At midnight the unmasking
ceremony happens and Crizmerkis springs the ambush with the aim of killing every
single guest in the house.

PCs should carefully manage their masque points, with some of the party making
an effort to mingle and gain more while the rest spend them on exploration
actions. It's important that the minglers manage to maintain the point total
above 0, and that the explorers avoid raising a general alarm. Either of these
things will cause Crizmerkis to spring the trap immediately.

Participation on the dance is optional, but winning the contest gives a ton of
Masque Points so the minglers will want to participate. This leaves them with 5
other segments on which to decide their actions before the trap is sprung.

Explorers who refuse to take part in the contest have 6 segments on which to
act. Their priority target here should be taking out the dottari, because
they're weaker and have less means of raising the alarm (several of the devils
are telepathic and can do so instantly). The less enemies there are at midnight,
the easier the final fight will be. Looting and detailed exploration of the
basement should wait until after the main ambush force is defeated. There are a
few extra monsters down there that will not take part in the ambush, so they can
be safely ignored for the moment.

### The Stroke of Midnight

At midnight, Crizmerkis (disguised as Barzilai) will stop the music and make an
ominous speech. During the speech, the dottari will split into 11 pairs and
stand guard over every one of the building's exits, locking those doors in the
process. Attacking them before the speech is done will cost the party a bunch of
Masque Points but will give them a surprise round and a tactical advantage.

The gist of the speech is that the guests present here have graciously
volunteered themselves to help maintain public order, by being massacred so the
blame can fall on the Silver Ravens and Barzilai can go after them. As soon as
it ends, the devils attack.

There are 300 guests in the house, not counting the PCs. The "spare" bone devil
and the erinyes will focus on slaughering them, while the bearded devils and
Crizmerkis will come for the PC directly. Most of them will be disguised as good
outsiders using illusions, but additional summoned devils and such will not have
disguises on. The PCs can draw the attention of the bone devil and erinyes by
engaging them in combat. If cornered, Crizmerkis might summon the vampire Jillia
Bailinus to help.

This is why killing the dottari early helps: if there are less of them, they're
going to leave some of those exits unlocked and unprotected. The PCs _must_ open
the exits so guests can leave: 1d6 guests escape every round for every unlocked
exit. With no open exits, 2d6 of them die every round to sheer crushing crowd
pressure. Those two devils kill even more per round if left alone. If you're
using GURPS, read "every round" as "every six seconds", otherwise things might
get a little impossible here.

### Results and Consequences

The event will go down in history as the Ruby Massacre. Whether the PCs or
Thrune are blamed for it depends on how well they do in this final fight.

If the PCs win the big fight they should have plenty of time to explore the rest
of the opera house. They'll get to fight a pack of hellhounds being used as
guard animals in the basement, find Vampire Jilia's coffing and stake her, and
find Shensen and the Song of Silver. There's also a lot of other cool loot to be
had, including a scroll of resurrection that can be used to bring the former
Mayor back to life after she's destroyed as a vampire.

If the PCs loose, they'll find themselves waking up inside a cell in Castle
Kintargo. Either way as soon as they leave the opera house we transition
directly to Volume 04, where we go full Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood.

## Notes and Impressions

The book makes that final battle sound quite difficult, particularly if the PCs
didn't prepare for it by coming into the party armed and taking out some of the
opposition ahead of time. Even if they did, it's going to be hard to save all
the bystanders. Dungeon Fantasy delvers should have it a bit easier because
the GURPS version of these opponents won't have HP in the triple digits, but
it's going to be tough even for them.

The same emphasis on etiquette from the Vyre banquet is present here, but here
it makes less sense given the surrounding context. The Silver Ravens only get
diplomatic/strategic benefits from thwarting the ambush if they _finish_ the
encounter with more than 20 Masque Points. I guess this is supposed to represent
the final impression left on the survivors about who is to blame for the
massacre, but it feels odd to have the party save these people in a very obvious
manner and not be recognized for it. I'd say that saving the heads of the noble
houses at least should be more than enough to get them on-side for the next
adventure, if that hasn't happened yet.

If the PCs have been buttering up the nobles on their own initiative prior to
this point, then the best strategic decision they can make is to break into the
opera house days before the ball, preferrably during daylight hours so the
vampire isn't a factor. All the same enemies will still be there, but the whole
party can focus on exploring the area and taking them out. They'll completely
forfeit the possible diplomatic rewards from the Masquerade, but not having to
split their focus between delving and socializing or rescuing bystanders is more
than worth it.
