---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 04, Part 02"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

Before I launch into a description of the final part of this adventure, I think
it's useful to go over some background information.

## Barzilai's Desperation Move

As we say back in the background for Adventure 01, Barzilai's ritual to become a
genius loci will only work as planned if he dies a natural death from old
age. So he very much wants to keep on living.

As soon as he sees he's lost the upper hand in the rebellion (at Authority 0),
the dictator will turtle up in the Temple of Asmodeus, and will order its high
priest to enact a ritual to contact Mephistopheles directly. The ritual takes
three days and a lot of sacrifices to complete, and when it does Mephistopheles
answers by sending _six pit fiends_ to serve Barzilai and by giving him and all
his underlings a major boost in stats that's going to last for a whole
month. Sou you can see why the PCs should be very interested in stopping this
and driving Thrune out of town as fast as possible. This is why the final part
of this adventure is an assault on the temple.

## The Song of Silver

Fortunately, after completing all the missions in Part 01 of this adventure, the
PCs should have eliminated some of Barzilai's main goons and acquired everything
they need to perform the Song of Silver: the score, the lyrics, and control of
the Opera House.

The Song of Silver is a ritual developed by the original Silver Ravens. It must
be performed on stage at the Kintargo Opera House, though it doesn't really
require an audience beyond the PCs and maybe some of their main allies. It's
short, taking only one minute to sing, and requires a skill test that should by
now be trivial for any bard in the party. Shensen can also sing it if there are
no PCs trained in Performance.

As soon as it completes, the dome of the opera house shines with a bright light
and the whole city is enveloped in a protective dome that has a whole bunch of
interesting effects and lasts for seven days. While it's active, all weapons in
the city count as being made of silver, and all evil outsiders must succeed at a
moderately difficult caster level check to teleport or use similar
abilities. The performer, every other PC, and up to four additional allies also
gain a major bonus on saves against charm and compulsion effects, and become
completely immune to fear. They can choose to end this blessing to automatically
pass a save, or to gain the effects of the _breath of life_ spell (which yes,
can return them to life if they die).

The song can only be performed once a month - the PCs should ideally only need
to perform it once in this adventure. When it's performed for the first time,
Barzilai's Authority is reduced by 15 if that happens while that's still an
issue. It would be optimal if the PCs went into the Temple while under the
effects of the Song, as it makes the assault much easier.

They can also use rebellion actions to obtain a full map of the temple, and to
sabotage the evil ritual, making it take twice as long to complete and slightly
penalizing the priests involved. This gives them more time.

## The Temple of Asmodeus

The temple is a very large round building. It used to be dedicated to Aroden but
was converted to the worship of Asmodeus when House Thrune took over
Kintargo. The Asmodeans sacrificed all the remaining priests of the dead god
back then, turning them into undead that hang around the temple and help defend
it. In addition to this atrocious contingent, the place is as heavily fortified
as its current occupants could make it.

As mentioned earlier, when Thrune's forces retreat to the temple its Asmodean
priests will begin a summoning ritual that will mean Game Over for the
rebellion. This takes 3 days to complete, so that's the window of time the PCs
have to stop it. You should definitely inform them of this.

PCs can use rebellion actions to make their assault on the temple easier. These
require DC 30 Secrecy checks, so if you haven't been tracking the Rebellion
rules so far, that's where the PCs should put their +15. Their actions during
the missions will gain them allies that will further help with this. One of the
actions gives them a nearly complete map of the temple. The other sabotages the
ritual, making it take 6 days instead of 3, penalizing its divine spellcasters
(they're demoralized!) and even reducing the frequency with which the temple
bells ring (see below).

### Raiding the Temple

The Temple of Asmodeus is a huuuge dungeon, and detailing every one of its rooms
would be a bigger slog than raiding the place in play. So let's take a more
concise approach.

The party has two main goals when raiding the temple: disrupt the infernal
ritual, and disable the cursed bells that are the temple's main defense. This
will break the remaining morale of the Thrune leadership, and cause them to flee
the city.

The first thing is to get inside. There are three double doors on the temple's
ground floor and a balcony with another double door on the second floor. All
three are protected by a magical trap that can teleport a PC straight to Hell
unless it's disarmed or dispelled first by the usual means.

The ground floor doors lead to empty foyer areas from which the PCs can either
go to the central nave or through doors into a series of small side rooms. The
balcony door leads directly into the rooms in the second floor loft.

As soon as the PCs enter, they must contend with some temple-wide magical
defenses. There's an effect similar to the Unhallow spell which is powered by a
pair of "infernal engines". These engines also maintain a series of more
localized magical hazards inside the temple.

After every fight in here, the bells gather 1d6 power points. When they reach 10
they ring, which inflicts a random bad effect on the PCs. The Song of Silver can
help resist some of them, but the only way to stop the bells is to reach the
belfry and exorcise them.

The ritual is happening in the nave, but getting in on the ground floor and
going directly there is suicidal. Not only is the enemy force there a
significantly hard encounter, it can also issue a general alert that will draw
many of the temple's other defenders here. Instead we want to eliminate all of
their advantages first.

The optimal route would be to enter through the balcony, which puts the PCs on
the second floor loft where they can head more or less directly to the infernal
engines. This is something they should be able to figure out if they get the
full map through a covert action.

Each engine is a magic circle carved on the stone floor with an imprisoned
outsider inside. The circle slowly drains the outsider's life force and uses it
to power the temple's security system. Disabling them requires either expert use
of Thief skills, damaging the (very tough) floor carving, or killing the "fuel
source". One holds a rakshasa, the other a lillend azata. Both have a high
number of negative levels and will gladly join in as temporary allies if those
are restored, despite their opposite alignments.

With the engines disabled, it's time to take care of the reinforcements. The
dragon Rivozair has most likely been defeated before the PCs make it into the
temple, but if that didn't happen for some reason she will be in her lair here
on the second floor. She will join in to defend the ritual unless she's defeated
first. In either case her hoard will be here, which is something to keep in mind
for after the dungeon is cleared.

The rest of the reinforcements are in the side rooms on the ground floor. Most
of these rooms are used in the temple's day to day activities and populated
either by the people and monsters responsible for those activities, or by
assigned defenders. Many of these would respond to a general alarm, but none of
them can raise one. Individually, each room is a medium-to-easy encounter, made
a bit easier by the fact that the engines are already off.

With the reinforcements neutralized and the engines disabled, it's finally time
to assault the ritual. The team performing it can stop for long enough to put up
a fight: that's High Priest Grivenner, five lower-level clerics, and five
summoned devils. Also in the room is a vampire high priestess of Zon-Kuthon (the
shadow-and-torture god) acting as a bodyguard, and a fiendish-shadow-snake thing
that will become a lot weaker with the infernal engines disabled.

It's still a tough fight, but much more manageable without additional enemy
waves or magic hazards. Theoretically there are several ways to disrupt the
ritual, but "killing everyone involved" is probably the best one.

### Optional Goal: Kill Thrune

This is the first time in the whole adventure path where the books recognize the
PCs might be able to fight Thrune and win. He's holed up in his inner sanctum on
the second floor, though exceptionally stealthy PCs might be able to catch him
sleeping in his room. He's a tough fight on par with the other boss battles in
this dungeon, but he's definitely defeatable.

The problem is he's nearly _unkillable_. The same infernal pact that lets him
survive without a heart also make him supernaturally resilient to HP damage. He
can keep operating normally until reduced from 206 all the way to -24 HP, after
which he becomes stunned. The stun only clears if he's healed to above -24 HP,
but he does have access to a class ability that gives him fast healing and he
uses that at the start of every fight.

There are two ways to kill him for real: total bodily destruction, or a certain
set of insta-death or soul-trapping spells.

The first happens "naturally" if you get him to -191 HP (!) via standard damage
sources, basically turning his body into hamburger. It also happens if you hit
him with Destruction or Disintegrate spells when he's below -24.

The second consists of spells like _flesh to stone_, _soul jar_, and other such
magic that bypasses damage reduction. This triggers a clause in his infernal
contract that kills him instantly.

Killing Barzilai here will prevent a later battle with him and will give the PCs
early access to a vital plot coupon, but it's perfectly possible to bypass the
guy entirely. Given what awaits the PCs in the belfry, avoiding Thrune to
preserve resources is an equally valid choice.

### Raiding the Profane Belfry

This dungeon is set up so that this is the last thing you do regardless of the
path you took through the Temple. This isn't an optional goal, and it's no
simple victory lap either - it's the final boss fight for the Temple of
Asmodeus.

The belfry can only be accessed via the hole on the roof of the nave, which only
"unlocks" once both infernal engines have been deactivated. There are no
stairs - you need flight or teleport magic to get there. A couple of magical
traps lie in wait just past the lip of the hole. And then there are the
guardians: four powerful undead with an even stronger leader, all former priests
of Aroden.

The leader can and will ring one of the bells with his mind as a free action
every round, causing an effect much more powerful than the ones the party has
been experiencing so far. A Silence spell is excellent protection, but will
prevent the PCs from casting most spells too.

### Hell's Bells

Once all guardians are destroyed, it's time to exorcise the bells. The procedure
for this is quite elaborate and it's definitely something I'd allow the PCs to
easily find out via prior research, because if they find themselves unprepared
here the whole raid was for nothing. They're going to need to at least one
scroll of Hallow and five of Dispel Evil, though I'd also recommend multiple
spares for each one. Preparing these spells also works, of course, but it eats
into the number of slots they have available for the fights in the temple.

Steps 1 and 2 are disabling the infernal engines and killing the guardians. Done
and done.

Step 3 is casting a Hallow spell on the belfry, or a Consecrate spell on each
of the five bells.

Step 4 is drumming the chorus to the Song of Silver on one of the bells, which
requires a trivial Performance check.

Step 5 is casting Dispel Evil on the same bell within a minute of drumming the
chorus on it. This causes the bell to begin glowing. A PC must then touch the
bell within 3 rounds (18 seconds). This will plunge the PC into a semi-real
vision related to the bell's nature, and if the PC can endure and overcome the
vision, the bell is exorcised.

Failure to perform the song's chorus, to enter the vision in time, or to
overcome the vision causes the bell to ring a discordant note that dispels the
Hallow effect and possibly summons a devil. The PCs must fight the monster and
begin the process anew from step 3.

For each vision, the GM describes the scene, lets the player describe their PCs
reaction to it, and then asks for a roll to overcome the ordeal. Good
roleplaying on the part of the PC can give a +5 on the roll. Success exorcises
the bell, failure deals ability drain and resets the procedure as above. The GM
should tailor the vision to the PC. Here's a summary of the visions and their
tests:

**Bell of Torments**: The PC is being tormented in Hell by a past enemy that
particularly vexed them in the past. After a while they realize they are holding
their favorite weapon, and can strike at their tormentor. _Test_: Attack roll
vs. AC 28.

**Bell of Slaves**: The PC is enslaved to a cruel master (someone who lorded
over them in the past), working on a grueling task. They must either tough it
out, escape their bonds, or stand up to their overlord. _Test_: Player's choice
of Fort, Ref, or Will vs. DC 21.

**Bell of Pride**: The PC is called before one of the gods to display their
skill or craft. Failing the test turns the vision into one of
humiliation. _Test_: A Craft, Perform, or Knowledge skill test vs. DC 30.

**Bell of Tyrants**: The PC is the defendant in a trial where Barzilai is the
judge, and the PC's friends and allies jeer at them from the crowd. The PC must
mound a successful defense. At the end of the trial, the crowd riots; on a
success, they tear the judge apart, on a failure they do it to the PC. _Test_:
A social skill vs. DC 30.

**Bell of Infernal Darkness**: The PC is sharing a happy moment with a loved
one, when suddenly the _entire world_ becomes a giant Barzilai Thrune with a
black hole where his heart should be. The PC must lead the loved one away from
danger through a shifting surreal landscape. _Test_: A movement skill
vs. DC 30.

These tests seem to be calibrated so that only the PC most specialized in that
skill has a decent chance of success, so unless the GM is very cruel I'd
recommend giving advance warning that a different PC must touch each bell and
throwing the PC in question straight into the vision they are most likely to
overcome.

### Concluding the Raid

Once all bells have been properly exorcised, the temple can be considered
cleared. Any remaining defenders, including Barzilai himself, either flee or get
banished back to hell if they were summoned creatures. The party has some time
to finish looting the temple as well.

We'll look at what happens after they leave in the next post.
