---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hells Rebels 3, Part 2"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - lets-read
---

Let's continue our reading of Dance of the Damned! I expect this to be the
second of three posts for this adventure. In the last one, we covered two
chapters of the book. Let's aim for two more here.

## Chapter 3: The Vyre Accord

Vyre is a city located in the same province as Kintargo. There's a whole
mini-guide on it attached to the book, but the only thing we really need to know
is that it's pretty much Fucked-Up Fantasy Venice.

Though technically part of Cheliax, Vyre is almost entirely independent. Cheliax
tolerates this because the city is a prime vacation destination for Chelish
elites. On the other hand, Vyre's slice of coast makes for a shitty port, so
they're almost entirely reliant on nearby Kintargo for the sea trade that gets
them most of their food and luxuries.

Vyre's government is extremely self-interested, but Cheliax has good reasons to
maintain good relations with them, and they have good reasons to maintain good
relations with Kintargo. If Vyre backs the rebellion, they can exert pressure on
those Chelish elites to back off from the province.

### Allies and Information

Advance information on the city comes from two sources. Captain Sargaeta (whom
they befriended in Adventure 02) can tell them the basics, and give them a ride
on his ship. Molly Mayapple can provide them with extensive and invaluable
advice on their actual goal in the city.

The PCs haven't met Molly yet, but they should have recovered a bunch of
documents belonging to her from the Lucky Bones. These are deeds for a set of
waterfront warehouses, which were stolen by the extinct Gray Spiders decades
ago. Even though Molly has since rebuilt her fortune (she owns a successful
hotel), she's still going to be extremely grateful when the PCs hand the deeds
back to her, and will provide a lot of insider information and help.

### The Basics

Vyre is ruled by five monarchs, each tasked with an aspect of government. The
one they want to meet is the Queen of Delights, who is in charge of the city's
economy and foreign relations. Vyre's laws are simple yet baroque, creating an
environment where non-lethal duels and eternal feuds are common, all sales are
final, but prejudice of any sort is frowned upon. However, you can get away with
anything if you follow the last and most important rule: don't get caught doing
it.

The Queen of Delights is set to host a banquet in the near future, and that will
be the PCs' opportunity to talk to her. The GM determines how long the PCs have
until the banquet. This would be the place to introduce side quests in Vyre or
give the PCs the opportunity to shop and prepare.


### The Banquet

The Banquet might be an entirely non-violent scene, but it's as difficult to
navigate as any dungeon. Vyre high-society etiquette is weird, and the Queen of
Delights heaps even more weird on top of that because she's basically Morticia
Addams.

Molly's help is absolutely vital here. The book doesn't even mention how the PCs
get invited to the banquet, but I assume she's instrumental in arranging
invitations for them and for herself. She's also an excellent source of
information on the complex etiquette surrounding the event.

This starts with what to wear and what gifts to bring, though PCs good at
gathering information might learn about Queen ~~Morticia~~ Manticce's less
well-known preferences.

There are nine other guests in the banquet aside from Molly and the PCs. We get
personality notes for each one. Most are only sources of roleplaying color, but
one of them will be important in the next adventure: Hei-fen, former
guildmistress of the Gray Spiders. Tough it's been decades since she escaped the
destruction of that guild, she's still a spiteful old wererat and is angry at
the PCs for stealing "her home". She's here to size them up for future reprisal.

The other "special" guest, not counted among those nine, is the Queen's long
dead husband, whose skeleton adorns one of the table's chairs. The correct move
here is to not acknowledge poor Gomez in any way. To do so is considered crass.

While roleplaying should be first and foremost in this scene it also has a
mechanical component. The banquet is effectivelly a long and colorful skill
challenge. PCs get a number of starting "banquet points" depending on how they
dress, what gifts they bring, and whether or not they participate in a standing
ovation when the Queen appears (they should!). After that they must pass skill
tests to correctly eat each bizarre dish in the banquet, or to make a good
impression during the conversation that accompanies each dish. The GM can have a
lot of fun emphasizing the weird and sometimes horrible of the dishes, which are
described in detail in the book. Each successful test brings banquet points. Bad
failures can subtract them. PCs can excuse themselves from some of the tests,
but not all.

Whether Vyre allies with the Silver Ravens or not depends entirely on how many
banquet points the characters manage to get. They need at least 20. A party of 5
who arrives properly dressed will start out with 10, so some risk-taking might
be necessary during the proceedings.

If the party succeeds, the Queen might invite the individual who gained them the
most points for an intimate night. Ties go to the prettiest or most charismatic
PC, and if they're still tied she invites all of the tied PCs. If the party has
more than 30 points _and_ the propositioned PC(s) accept Manticce's invitation,
she will also offer the group her personal alliance, providing mechanical boosts
to the strategic rebellion layer.

### Notes and Impressions

This part is quite fun and very different than what you would expect from a
standard dungeon fantasy adventure. Even in a condensed approach I'd recommend
keeping it.

The downside when using GURPS is that if your PCs are overly focused on dungeon
delving they might not have the skills necessary to cause a good impression
here. In this case I suggest being generous and using the same tactic as the
original module: if none of the delvers has the most appropriate skill, ask for
a roll on the closest skill one of them does have. That said, characters who
followed the tips from the [Player's Guide][2] or who used earned points to
become a bit sneakier and more social shouldn't have too much trouble covering
their bases.

## Part 4: Breaking the Menador Gap


The Menador Gap is a mountain pass in the mountains separating Ravounel from
central Cheliax. It's the only viable route for marching an army through those
mountains, so it must be closed. The PCs start the adventure at level 7, and the
book says they should be level 8 before tackling this chapter.

The gap is protected by a fortress named Menador Keep. It used to be an old
dwarf fort, but is now occupied by Chelish military. Rexus, who studied those
old Silver Raven documents extensively, can tell the PCs that there's a dwarven
self-destruct mechanism deep within the bowels of the fort. The PCs' goal here
is to get to that mechanism, activate it, and get out. This will demolish the
fort in a way that ensures the pass is completely closed.

It's theoretically possible to demolish the fort from a distance using spells
like Earthquake, but a) this might not block the pass completely and b) it will
bury all the sweet loot located inside the fortress.

### Dungeon: Menador Gap

The fortress itself has two above-ground floors and an underground level. Its
ground floor contains a courtyard with two large gates on either side, which
blocks the mountain pass. Inside the building are a large number of guard posts,
utility/storage rooms, and a couple of monster pens.

The fort is defended by a garrison of 23 soldiers, commanded by Lucien Thrune, a
wyvern-riding cavalier. He also has a bound erinyes devil with him, and a very
unhappy bound jann servant. Another devil acts as a stationary sentry at the
entrance to the treasury. The soldiers are weak individually, but dangerous in
large groups. They wear mail and are armed with halberds and crossbows, favoring
ranged attacks over melee.

The best way to handle this might be as a Metal Gear-like stealth mission. The
PCs are very likely to have the necessary magic to turn the whole party
invisible and levitate them for a short time. Clever PCs might find the entrnce
to the wyvern's stable down on the cliffside and enter through there, bypassing
a lot of the security measures on the surface. The same technique might allow
them to land atop the fort's battlements and begin from there, bypassing the
courtyard kill box. Even if they immediately go loud and begin a frontal
assault, they'll begin doing that from a hugely advantageous position.

The third-best option is for them to disguise themselves as someone authorized
to cross the Gap and ride into the courtyard, from which they can force their
way into the fort. It's less than ideal because they can be targetted by
crossbow and ballista fire from the battlements.

Starting an overt assault will sound a general alert and have every soldier
converge on the party's position. It's easier to deal with them piecemeal,
though that might require magic to prevent the sounds of fighting from spilling
out. Stealth might also allow the party to fight the "elites" (Lucien, his
wyvern, the erinyes) while they're alone and isolated. The jann servant,
Zorumar, is a potential ally here. He can't do anything against his master
directly, but he can give all sorts of information about enemy locations and the
layout of the fort, including any secret doors. Killing Lucien will set Zorumar
free, and he will return in the future to gift the party with magic items in
thanks.

There's a secret door in the fort's armory leading to the ancient dwarven
mechanism in the "basement" level. The only one of its current inhabitants who
knows about this is Zorumar.  The device, called the Anvil of Unmaking, is
protected by ancient guardians and traps, some of which can be bypassed by
proper prayers to the dwarf god Torag and by diplomacy. Activating the
contraption will cause it to completely destroy the fortress in 10 minutes. The
PCs have that long to run away and get clear. Also the tremors and rumbling will
definitely put every remaining enemy in the place on high alert, if they weren't
already.

Loot-wise, the most valuable places to hit here are the treasury (obviously),
the war room, and Lucien Thrune's person. Lucien has a sweet flaming sword, lots
of bling, and the key to the treasury chest. The treasury has a bunch of magical
gear and the fort's payroll. And the war room has an extremely valuable dagger
lying around next to a pile of important strategic documents full of classified
Chelish military info.

### Notes and Impressions

A good old tactical espionage action romp, with the potential to turn into a
wonderfully chaotic battle if the PCs trip the alarm. It's likely to be the most
time-consuming scene in the entire adventure.

I suggest playing the enemies with a modicum of intelligence here, but remember
that raising the alarm is not an automatic action. It a single guard spots the
PCs, the rest of the fortress won't automatically know they're there. An alarm
must be raised, which takes time and is susceptible to disruption from the
PCs.

[2]: {{ "/2017/05/01/hells-rebels-player-guide.html" | relative_url }}
