---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 5, Part 1"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

If everything went right in the first four adventures of this campaign our brave
PCs managed to stage a successful uprising against the dastardly Barzilai
Thrune, decimating his lackeys, running him out of town, and later killing him
in a final confrontation. The city of Kintargo is once again free, and Lord
Mayor Jilia Bailinus has been reinstated after the PCs helped her recover from a
slight case of vampirism inflicted by Thrune's allies.

The Silver Ravens are still around as an organization, but many of its members
either go back to their previous lives or accept legitimate jobs with the new
government.

After last adventure's celebration is over, the city still has much to worry
about, however. Barzilai left it a mess, and it needs to rebuild. And while the
empire of Cheliax is currently busy suppressing another uprising in its
heartlands, it's sure to send a huge army to Kintargo when it's done. The city
cannot win against Cheliax in an all-out war.

The strategy layer of the campaign is over and done with, tough the PCs still
have access to pre-delve covert actions. Actual strategy and administration is
the government's job now. The PCs can't do a lot to help with the actual
rebuilding efforts, but in this adventure they'll find out their help is still
needed to keep Cheliax at bay and secure their newfound freedom.

The party starts this adventure at level 13.

## Details in Distrust

The book assumes the party killed Barzilai Thrune in the precious adventure, and
retrieved the Chelix Crux in the process of looting all his sweet high-powered
gear. In fairness this is a very likely event.

The Crux is a 12-sided, Hellraiser-style puzzle box, roughly the size of a human
fist. Remember the bizarre banquet back in Adventure 3, where one of the dishes
had puzzle-box sauce containers? This is the thing they were imitating.

Barzilai carried the Crux inside his own chest cavity, in the place where his
heart used to be. By default that's a gaping hole and very obvious once you peel
away his armor. In the likely event that Barzilai's body has been completely
destroyed, his gear is left behind, and that includes the Crux. It's possible to
make it harder to find but I recommend against it: the PCs really need this
mandatory plot coupon to get the adventure started.

Opening the Crux is a simple matter for a level 13 thief-type, since they can
keep trying until they succeed. It's also possible for a strong character to
force it open, which causes a mild explosion but still leaves the contents of
this particular box unharmed.

Inside is a scroll case and a weird yellow amulet. The case contains three
documents. The first is a note that gives important clues about the rest. It was
written by a devil lawyer named Odexidie (Oddie from now on), offering
"additional consultation on the Kintargo Contract" if Barzilai visits his
office. It has instructions on how to use the enclosed amulet to reach that
office (it's in Hell), and mentions a password to both "unmask the contract" and
pass through Oddie's security safely. The password isn't written down on the
note, but PCs can infer both Oddie and Barzilai knew it.

The second document looks like a lengthy prayer to Asmodeus but it's actually
the Kintargo Contract, masked by a Secret Page spell. I imagine the usual magic
detection methods will also reveal this. The spell could be undone through
brute-force dispelling, but if Barzilai's corpse is available the PCs or an ally
can use Speak With Dead to make it reveal the password (the nonsense word
"kasnum", an anagram of "unmask").

The third document is also an infernal contract, though this one has no mask
applied. It's the contract that Barzilai signed with Mephistopheles, and a
thorough reading of it will reveal his entire master plan.

### Reading Infernal Contracts

This book includes a whole section with rules for infernal contracts in the
back, and I'll summarize the relevant bits here.

Your typical infernal contract is written in obfuscated Infernal legalese and
is between a specific devil and a specific mortal. It binds the devil to provide
the mortal with a boon or service in exchange for payment. The service can be
anything within the capabilities of the signatory devil (literally anything for
pit fiends and above, since they can grant _wishes_). The payment is typically
the mortal's soul, collected at the moment of death, but it doesn't have to
be. Devils can ask for something else, and they often like to get creative.

You can skim a contract to see its basic terms, but every contract is a, well,
devious trap full of hidden clauses and loopholes that can only be found on a
thorough reading. Contracts have a Complexity rating that acts like AC, and a
number of "knowledge points" that act like HP. The values depend on the
contract's CR. PCs can use the Linguistics skill or one of the specific
Knowledge skills listed in the contract's stats to "attack" the contract's
Complexity and deplete its KP. Each "attack" represents 8 hours of
study. Getting a contract's KP to 0 yields XP as if the party had defeated a
monster of the same CR.

Every contract has an accidental loophole that allows it to be terminated
without prejudice, and at least one intentionally hidden clause placed by the
devil who wrote it. As the contract's KP is depleted, the hidden clauses are
revealed, and when it reaches 0 the reader learns the termination clause.

### Heart's Harvest

If the party hasn't yet figured out the entirety of Barzilai's plan, this
contract tells it all. It has normal stats for its CR (15).

**Plain Text**: Barzilai gets the formula for a ritual that can transform him
into a genius loci at the end of his natural life span; he also gets the ability
to survive without a heart, which is what made him so hard to kill. In exchange
he must bind a loyal servant of his to a devil who serves Mephistopheles (either
Nox or Rivozair fit the bill), and carry the contract on his person at all times
while he lives.

**Hidden Condition**: If Barzilai dies from violence or accident before his
natural time is up, his soul and the souls of all who serve him directly are
forfeit to Mephistopheles. That only delays his transformation, however. It
doesn't stop it.

**Termination Clause**: If Barzilai's heart is reunited with his body, the
contract ends. If this happens after he's died and gained a new "afterlife" body
in Hell, he remains dead but is forever prevented from becoming a genius loci.

This reveals our campaign's remaining _third_ big problem. Barzilai's plans have
not been stopped, and we definitely don't want him to become Ravounel's genius
loci. However, this is a "future us" problem and we need to tackle a few more
urgent ones first.

### The Kintargo Contract

This contract is more obfuscated than usual for its CR (also 15). You need
Oddie's help to bring its stats down to the expected level of difficulty, but
that's a moot point. If you get Odie to help you, he'll tell you all about the
contract's secrets with minimal prompting.

**Plain Text**: This is a sub-contract of the wider Cheliax Covenant signed
between Queen Abrogail I and Asmodeus. The Covenant allows House Thrune to
receive military aid from Hell in order to acquire and maintain its control over
Cheliax. This contract says that the duchy of Ravounel is not officially a
province of Cheliax, but that it agrees to be "defended" by House Thrune. The
contract goes on to define what "Ravounel" and "Kintargo" mean almost like a
constitution.

The Duchy of Ravounel is governed by the Lord Mayor of Kintargo. A Lord Mayor is
appointed by a Board of Governors whose five members each belong to a specific
familial lineage, known to the signatories but not written down in the contract.

The reason all of this is important is because Cheliax can only send its armies
into Ravounel with the express permission of the Lord Mayor. There is a severe
penalty for doing that without permission, but figuring it out requires a close
reading.

**Hidden Clause**: If there is no officially appointed governor, Cheliax does
not need permission to send armies into Ravounel. The Board hasn't met in about
70 years, and its existence is unknown to the general public. Therefore, neither
Barzilai nor Jilia count as officially appointed.

If Cheliax marches armies into the region after being denied permission, _the
entire Cheliax Covenant_ is voided. Hell removes its backing, making Cheliax an
easy target for its many antifascist neighbors, resentful protectorates, and
home-grown rebels.

**Termination Clause**: The contract cannot be terminated while the Cheliax
Covenant is active, but is immediately voided when the Covenant is
terminated. No canceling just this contract in order to invade!

### Deciphering the Contracts

The Heart's Harvest contract can be deciphered normally, but the Kintargo
Contract is too hard to read even for 13th-level PCs. The party can get the
Plain Text quickly and without a roll, but they can't reliably hit the
contract's inflated Complexity DC without Oddie's help. He's also the surest
source of information on which lineages make up the Board of Governors.

The Board's last meeting was shortly before Abrogail I's death, around 70 years
ago. The practice fell in disuse after this, but the Board still retains its
powers since the contract is still valid. If the PCs can get the descendants of
its constituent lineages together they could officially ratify Jilia Bailinus
and prevent a full-scale Chelish invasion.

This much can be deduced from the plaintext, but the identities of the lineages
are not written down in the contract. Someone who was alive and politically
active back then would still remember, but only two individuals fit this
description: Jackdaw and Oddie.

The book _really_ _really_ wants you to visit Oddie.

#### Choice 1: How about No?

The "plaintext" of the Kintargo Contract contains all the context your PCs need
to proceed with the adventure. They'll know that a properly ratified mayor can
forbid Cheliax from invading, and they'll know they need to discover the names
of the Board's families. Knowing that the penalty for a breach is the unmaking
of Cheliax is fun, but not strictly necessary - the plaintext already mentions
the penalty is "severe".

So a party that has rescued Jackdaw can just ask her for the names of the Board
families and proceed to the investigation without ever interacting with Oddie!

You do technically miss out on that big chunk of XP, which I guess is the main
reason why the book wants you to take the other choice. GMs can remedy this by
just giving it to the PCs anyway, possibly later on as part of the story reward
for ratifying a mayor.

#### Choice 2: Strolling into the City of Dis

Using the amulet summons a heavy metal worm-maw-thing that acts as a portal to
Oddie's offices in the city of Dis. The portal is effectively one-way. They need
to find their own way back once they're done. It's a good idea to perform the
Song of Silver before they go through.

Oddie's office is located inside a much larger building, the library that holds
all of Hell's contracts, but it's physically isolated from it. The decor is a
mix of Modern Corporate Hellscape and Literal Hellscape. There is no
illumination, as devils can see in the dark, but there is a reception area, a
pair of conference rooms, a hall with a gaudy centerpiece, a special room for
contract signatures, and private offices for both Oddie and his secretary. The
centerpiece hangs over a pit of hellfire, the signing room has torture
instruments in it and there are also oubliettes for damned souls off to one
side.

There are a bunch of devils here acting as staff: two barbed devil
receptionists, an ice devil security guard, a couple of rust devil paralegals
currently extracting a rib from their latest client, and a "succubus but Lawful"
secretary in addition to Oddie himself (a contract devil, of course).

There are several ways this can go down. Parties who know the password can speak
it to the receptionists, who will take them to a conference room and notify
Oddie. He takes 3d6 hours to show up because his sense of time is a bit warped,
but show up he does, and has a peaceful meeting with the PCs. Fortunately for
the PCs, the wait is merely boring rather than hazardous: the conference room
has a bathroom with a working toilet and a potable-water sink. It's also
furnished with a drink selection and a magical spoon that can generate meals on
demand (the food is harmless and delicious but looks like literal shit).

Parties who don't know the password can try to be sneaky. The office has no
invisibility countermeasures but they should apply that invisibility before
stepping into the portal to avoid notice by the receptionists. Oddie will be
impressed if they manage to reach his office undetected.

Another option is mind-controlling the receptionists and have them escort the
PCs directly to Oddie's office.

Finally, the group can always go in with blades drawn and kill every devil in
sight until they reach Oddie, who will be ready to fight them instead of
talking.

Peaceful routes still give you all the XP you would have gotten for defeating
these devils in combat, even Oddie. You miss out on some loot, but there's
nothing spectacular in there.

### The Devil Advocate

If the party manages a peaceful meeting with Oddie, he'll be quite delighted to
know they intend to exploit the Kintargo Contract and will actually struggle to
disguise his excitement. He's as much of an evil asshole as any devil, but he's
also obsessed with his craft and considers the Kintargo Contract to be a
masterpiece.

Oddie _wants_ it hidden clause to be exploited, because once it becomes public
it will impress both his peers and his superiors for managing to slip something
of that magnitude past Asmodeus himself. And fortunately for the PCs he doesn't
care who exploits the clause. He'll be as eager to help them as he was to help
Abrogail and Barzilai.

Because of this, Oddie will not only tell the group the names of the five
lineages, he will also reveal the whole story behind the contract and all of its
clauses without asking for anything in return. Abrogail wanted to have it as an
"escape clause" in case Asmodeus betrayed her. She could have herself declared
mayor of Kintargo and forbid Cheliax from invading, voiding the entire
Covenant and recovering her soul. Barzilai discovered the existence of the
contract by bribing Oddie and wanted to have it to avoid reprisals from his
family once he ascended. And now the party is going to use it to gain
independence for all of Ravounel.

With the information in hand, the party now needs to find a way back into their
home plane. They might be able to cast Plane Shift on their own, but that
deposits them in a random spot on Golarion, so it's not ideal. Oddie has a
solution, though! Do you want to sign a contract?

His contract is awfully straightforward. The party gets to use the worm tunnel
to go back and appear on the main stage of the Opera House, in exchange for the
amulet that let them come here in the first place (no souls involved).  The
hidden clause states Oddie can use the same route to go to Kintargo and back at
will until the contract ends. The contract ends when they ratify a mayor. The
devil will let the party study the contract for as long as they want, in the
conference room, and only intends to use the hidden clause to pressure the PCs
into ratifying a governor if he thinks they're taking too long.

If they _kill_ Oddie in the course of breaking into his office, they should
still be able to retrieve the names from his notes, but returning home becomes
harder. It's Plane Shift or nothing.

## Next Time On "Let's Read Hell's Rebels!"

You got the names. Now what?




<!--  LocalWords:  Cheliax Ravounel Chelish Kintargo Odexidie Asmodeus Abrogail
 -->
<!--  LocalWords:  Thrune Kintargo's Barzilai Bailinus Chelix Barzilai's
 -->
