---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels Adventure 2: Conclusion"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - pathfinder
    - gurps
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/350px-Hell's_Rebels_Logo.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

In the last post I said it was time to finally end Turn of the Torrent, but that
was a little hasty. The last post covered the big dungeon - this one is the
denouement.

Clearing the Lucky Bones hideout completely and reactivating the magical pump
makes the place usable as the official home base of the Silver Ravens,
increasing the maximum power of the rebellion. Over the course of this adventure
the PCs have also likely gained the support of the Torrent Knights, earned a
number of favors from a powerful Navy captain, and caught a notorious serial
killer.

Those last three goals are supposed to help cement the Silver Ravens' reputation
as heroic protectors among the people of Kintargo. Catching the Temple Hill
Slasher is obviously a bit PR coup, plus I guess the contact networks of the
remaining Torrent Knights and Captain Sargaeta would be pretty dilligent in
spreading the good word about the PCs, making the people like them more even as
Barzilai's administration likes them less. All of this forces Barzilai to
officially acknowledge the existence of the Silver Ravens, and to be
_diplomatic_ about it.

Thrune hosts an award ceremony at the Kintargo Opera House and issues a very
public invitation to the PCs. During the ceremony he makes a speech praising
their civic-mindedness and presents them with gifts.

While The Barzilai has it out of the PCs, he will not try to hurt them here, and
will do his best to appear civil. The gifts are even magic items tailored to be
useful to the PCs! The trick here is that the items are distinctive enough to be
tracked via _locate object_ (D&D) and Seeker (GURPS), which will likely come to
bite the PCs unless they're very crafty. Really, the best thing they can do with
these "rewards" is ditch them far away from the Lucky Bones, but there's a good
chance they won't think about the tracking angle and keep them.

And speaking of crafty, PCs who _don't_ try to pick a fight during the ceremony
gain a XP reward for being discreet. According to the book, stabbing Thrune in
front of a crow of thousands might be satisfying, but is unlikely to be
productive at this point in time.

The book also says that Barzilai has completed one of the rituals necessary for
becoming a genius loci not long before the public ceremony, and so is looking a
bit haggard and pale. He'll be back in top form in time for the fight against
the PCs, of course.

## Going Off the Rails

The book seems to treat the award ceremony as sort of a closing cutscene in this
adventure, but if you think about it a bit more there are a few things that can
derail it. You shouldn't prevent your PCs from going off the rails, but here are
some tips on how to adapt if that happens.

It could be that your PCs were so good at covering their tracks none of their
big public deeds was very public at all. Maybe they let someone else take the
credit for catching the Slasher and otherwise did their utmost to prevent their
Notoriety from rising. On the one hand, Thrune would know almost nothing about
them. On the other, he'd have no reason to host the ceremony, preventing the
"tense encounter". I imagine it's actualy better for the PCs in the long run if
it doesn't happen, but it's going to change some of the big assumptions on
future books.

The PCs could simply not show up to the ceremony, which would certainly be
funny! Depending on how they've been presenting themselves to the public, this
could actually have a positive repercussion for them, though most likely it
would disappoint people and ding their reputation a bit. Other than that the
plot remains mostly intact.

And there is the ever so tempting approach of "show up, take the awards, stab
Thrune in front of all Kintargo, drop the mic". The book tries to discourage
this by describing Barzilai's entourage, which includes a dozen beefy
hellknights, Kintargo's High Priest of Asmodeus, and two very large three-headed
hellhounds. This might work as a deterrent on Pathfinder, since it sends the
message that "this encounter would be much higher level than your party", but it
might not be enough to dissuade a party of foolhardy Dungeon Fantasy delvers
from having a go. It would likely still not be an _easy_ battle, but hey,
Barzilai is less than three feet away, he's weakened from his sinister ritual,
and if he dies anything but a natural death his master plan is foiled!
Fast-Draw, behead, profit!

Should the PCs succeed in killing Barzilai Thrune here, they haven't exactly
"won" Hell's Rebels yet. They still have a rebellion to conduct and that just
got a lot harder since killing the Lord-Mayor in such a public way is likely to
erode a lot of the good reputation the Ravens might have accrued among the more
moderate citizens. All of the adventure steps related to organizing the
rebellion still need to happen, and they need to happen much faster since
Cheliax is going to have some extra incentive to send a rebel-crushing army to
Kintargo. No one liked Thrune much, but they would still have to answer his
murder with overwhelming force at this stage. Also, the rest of Thrune's cronies
would have the perfect excuse to go fullly genocidal on the city.

What I'm saying is, the PC (and the player!) that goes up to shake Barzilai's
hand at this ceremony better not be Impulsive.
