---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels Adventure 06, Part 04"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - lets-read
    - gurps
    - hells-rebels
---

In Part 03 of the adventure, the PCs found the site of the Soul Anchor and
extracted Barzilai Thrune's heart from it after fighting the defenders he left
behind and either fighting or allying with the angry ghosts of the people they
had killed.

Now, our heroes are at the peak of their power, possibly with a Mythic rank to
their name, and there is only one thing left to do: go to Hell itself and shove
that heart in Barzilai's face to, finally and for the last time, stop all of his
evil plans.

The PCs should be level 17 when they start this part, and it looks like they're
no longer expected to level up before the end. Which kinda makes this dungeon
crawl an even bigger slog than it feels like at first, all designed to wittle
their resources down and make them waste precious time before the fight.


## Dang It All To Heck

Barzilai is currently being tortured in a bone tower on Mephistopheles' corner
of Hell, and also undergoing a painful transformation into a genius loci. This
is where those Soul Points I mentioned in Part 2 come into play. His initial
value is 10. He slowly gets more from any Part 2 haunts that were allowed to
grow out of control.

Once the PCs reach the tower where he's imprisoned, the timetable steps up and
Barzilai begins gaining 1 Soul Point per day regardless of whether the haunts
are active or not. He gets more powerful the more points he has, and if the PCs
let him accumulate 51 or more before they get to him, his plans succeed. So
don't waste time!


## The Ribway

When the PCs arrive at the tower, Mephistopheles intervenes to redirect them to
a body-horror platform at its base, where a pit fiend awaits them with a welcome
speech. The fiend, named Ourgothan, has been ordered to explain the situation to
them, and will be all courteous and friendly as long as the PCs don't try to
start a fight (in which case he'll go all-out).

The tower was built from Barzilai's own psyche with the sole purpose of
torturing him. He's at the top, but it's impossible to reach him from the
outside by climbing or flying up the walls. The only way they can do it is by
going through the tower's interior.

Mephistopheles will allow the PCs to enter and climb the tower, because he
doesn't actually want to let Barzilai go free, but that's the extent of his
"help". The party must follow three rules while here:

- **No leaving the Tower and environs.** Not that they have any reason to do
  this. There's nothing relevant out there.

- **No rescuing the "truly damned" from their punishment.** That's the only
  thing that can make Mephistopheles truly angry. Keep in mind that the devils
  doling out that punishment are allowed to fight the PCs, and that the PCs are
  allowed to fight back and even kill the devils. The rule is only about the
  souls.

- **No bypassing the trials set for them.** This is more of a suggestion than a
  hard rule. Visiting every single room between them and Barzilai will give the
  PCs the most chances to weaken their enemy before the final fight. They have
  to weight that against the need for speed.

Ourgothan is not inclined to answer questions after giving his expository
speech, but PCs skilled in History can remember some details about him and
realize he's bound to answer any questions the PCs have if they bribe him with a
gift that was freely given to them by an enemy. The bracelet they got from
Nereza in Part 1 of this adventure qualifies!

The book has a bunch of answers to possible questions, but the most relevant
ones are these two:

- **How exactly can we weaken Barzilai?** In response, Ourgothan will describe
  the general layout of the tower and the awful portal mechanic, both of which
  are detailed in the next section.

- **Are there any souls inside that aren't "truly damned"?** There are two, who
  came to be trapped in the tower by other means and whose punishments aren't
  mandated by Hell. The PCs will know them when they see them, and attempting to
  rescue them is not a breach of the rules.

The pit fiend will stop answering questions when he grows tired of them (and
then the GM judges the PCs have all the info they need). They're free to pass
him by and enter the tower.


## The Tower of Bone

The tower is a dimensionally fucky building. Thousands of kilometers tall on the
outside, it only has nine floors on the inside, each a kind of pocket
dimension. Barzilai is on the ninth.

Here is where you start to see the cheaty protections that every high level
dungeon seems to have. The PCs can't teleport or scry into the tower from the
outside. Once inside, they can only scry or teleport to locations within the
same floor. The exterior walls are very though but breakble. However, the other
side contains only highly pressurized hellfire so demolition is not a good idea.

Trying to rescue a damned soul angers Mephistopheles and causes him to send a
pit fiend to kill the PCs the first time they do it. His anger abates for the
moment if they kill the fiend, but if they break the rules again he sends two,
then three, and so on. I'm sure the PCs can keep doing this for a while, but
it's a waste of time.

Each of the first eight floors is a torture chamber themed around one of
Barzilai's personality flaws. It contains damned souls, the devils responsible
for tormenting them, and quite possibly one or more environmental hazards. It
also contains 3 or 4 dimensional portals linking it to other floors.

The GM-facing dungeon map labels the portals with numbers. Portal 1 is the
obvious exit of the tower, and all of the others are paired. Entering a portal
labeled 2 will always take you to the other portal labeled 2, on another floor.

From the point of view of the players, the portals are totally unmarked. The
exit is still obvious, but identifying the others requires peering into them and
sitting through some vision of Barzilai's past related to the portal's
destination floor. The same destination floor will always show the same vision,
so at least it's consistent.

When the PCs enter the tower they always start at Floor 1. Floor 8 has a special
portal that leads to floor 9. The shortest route to the end is 1 -> 2 -> 8,
bypassing most of the tower. However, as mentioned before, going through every
floor will give the PCs the most changes to weaken the final boss.

When a PC goes through a portal, they suffer a small chunk of hellfire damage,
and a small penalty that lasts for 10 minutes and can be eliminated through the
usual means. The penalty varies with the destination floor. It's stuff like -2
to a save, -4 to Initiative, a small reduction of maximum HP, and so on. Each
individual debuff is slight, but they add up. A DC 20 Fortitude save halves the
damage and negates the penalty.

A PC can voluntarily "accept" the flaw, which counts as failing the save and
makes the debuff last for their entire stay in the tower, but reduces Barzilai's
Soul Point total by 1. This is framed as the PC demonstrating "understanding"
and "forgiveness" for Barzilai Thrune, which "weakens his resolve". I
_absolutely hate_ this mechanic. I'm actually kind of offended that this
adventure expects PCs to see visions of Barzilai torturing people, beating
servants to death or vivisecting small animals for the lulz and think "this is
understandable and forgivable".

This asshole doesn't need understanding or forgiveness. All he needs is to be
_stopped_. If he's anything like the people he's named after, any sort of
compassion you show him will be interpreted as weakness and increase his
resolve.

Instead of putting up with this, I'd just reduce his Soul Points by 1
automatically when the PCs first enter a floor. Barzilai gets nervous when the
people who already succeeded at killing him once get one step closer to doing it
again.

Below you see brief descriptions of the floors.


### The Slog

Floors 1, 2, 5 and 8 are variations on the same theme. It's a fight against a
certain number of powerful devils in a hazardous environment that's also filled
with the damned souls of Barzilai's willing servants. The devils are there to
torture the damned, but they're all very excited about the opportunity to
torture living heroes, so they attack on sight and fight to the death.

The maps and hazards vary, but the purpose of these floors is to just waste the
party's time and resources. Messing with the portals is the main reason why
you'd want to go to all of them.


### Floor 3: Bloodwall Bastion

One special feature makes this different from the Slog floors. There's a big
crystaline heart sculpture in the middle of the room. If the PCs touch
Barzilai's heart to it, it turns into a fleshy beating heart. This removes 2 SP
from Thrune and makes this room's portal debuffs easier to resist.

Otherwise, this is a child-themed torture chamber whose guardians will only try
to kill the PCs when they try to leave, instead of attacking on sight.


### Floor 4: The Bathhouse

This is not a torture chamber, but a nicely appointed and perfumed
bathhouse. It's meant to torture Thrune himself, who has a pathological
obsession with his estranged sister. There's a statue of her holding a lyre,
which every so often animates and plays the score to the Song of Silver. In here
is also a nereid named Sondilisa, who was kidnapped from her home in the Plane
of Water by one of Mephistopheles' lackeys. She looks almost exactly like the
lost sister, by pure coincidence. Her captor instructed her to sing the lyrics
to the Song when the statue begins playing. Barzilai is hooked up to a scrying
sensor that activates whenever the song starts.

Sondilisa is one of the innocents trapped here. She will fight if attacked, but
she's not hostile at first. She'Äºl tell the PCs all she knows about her
situation, and will collaborate with any rescue attempts. She can't use the
portals and is missing her shawl, but knows it's in the tower.

The shawl is with Sondilisa's captor on Floor 6, and the PCs can rescue her by
Plane Shifting her to the Plane of Water, or even to the physical world. Doing
so knocks another 2 SP off Barzilai. Fighting and killing her has the opposite
effect, enraging him and giving him 4 points.


### Floor 6: Fangrane's Reliquary

Fangrane is an "apostate devil", an intellectual of sorts. He's one of
Mephistopheles' favored servants, and his job is to catalogue what the damned
knew in life and devise personalized tortures for them. He's the one who
captured the nereid on Floor 4.

This floor is a big library with several rooms. The books here provide massive
bonuses to Knowledge skill tests. The damned souls here are forced to work as
librarians.

Fangrane... doesn't actually mind the party's presence. He's busy trying to fix
an interdimensional gate that he managed to blow up with unrelated
shenanigans. He'll only attack if the party interferes with his work or cracks
his safe. They can even use the library!

The nereid's shawl is in one of the rooms here, as are a few other potentially
useful items - the PCs can pick these up and even return the shawl without
triggering Fangrane's fight.

If they do fight and defeat him, the PCs can use his key to loot the safe and
can try to finish repairing the gate themselves. This requires a few days of
work and three successes in Arcana rolls that benefit from the library. It might
be worth doing if the PCs are low on resources, or if events in your game cause
them to be stuck in Hell after defeating Barzilai. Otherwise it's a big red
herring.


### Floor 7: Bower of the Torn Wing

This floor looks like a ruined cathedral, with parts of the floor opening up
into bottomless pits and a big pillar wrapped in barbed wire and bones in the
center.

This is where the other captive innocent is: a ghaele azata named Thirothryn,
who tried to break into the tower and was captured. They're bound in chains on a
platform at the other side of a pit.

Approaching the captive triggers the floor's undead guardians, formed from the
barbed wire and bones around that pillar. Once the guardians are defeated, the
PCs should have an easy time can rescue the fey. They're at the brink of death
and missing an arm, but can be healed normally. Thirothryn will gladly fight
alongside the PCs for the rest of the dungeon once brought back to fighting
form.


### Floor 9: The Apex of Bone.

Finally, _finally_, they get to Barzilai. The gate that leads here from Floor 8
is one way. Once the PCs cross it, they can no longer go back inside the
tower. It's do or die.

This place is a creepy platform of flowing bone with pillars of hellfire around
it and a big metal pillar in the center to which Thrune is chained. He turned
into a bone devil after death, but is still recognizable, and still retains many
of his skills and powers. When the PCs enter, he says a stock villainous line
and attacks, intent on getting his revenge.

Barzilai has two separate stat blocks. One is "just" a bone devil with 16
inquisitor levels, and the other is that with massively boosted stats and 2
mythic tiers. Which one the PCs meet depends on how many Soul Points Barzilai
has. 5 or less means they face the weakened version, and 6 or more means they
face the mythic one.

Remember, his default initial value is 10, and he gets one more per day once the
PCs arrive at the tower. During the ascent, they have the opportunity to reduce
his total by up to 12 by visiting every floor (8), messing with the crystal
heart (2), and rescuing the nereid (2).

Thrune lacks the absurd resilience he had when he was human, but he has a lot
more HP, and comes back to life fully restored 1 hour after being killed. The
goal of the PCs here is to shove his heart back into his still gaping chest
cavity. They can either do this while he's temporarily dead, or they can
_grapple_ him and do it while he's restrained. Badass!

As soon as he has his heart back, Barzilai's transformation stops, and his plan
fails. He reverts to his weakened form if he was in the stronger one, becomes
stunned for an entire round, and staggered for every round afterwards if he
survives that. Depleting his HP (or yanking his heart back out!) will kill him
forever.


### Ending and Denouement

When Barzilai is defeated, his body is consumed in a pillar of hellfire, and a
projection of Mephistopheles appears to talk to the PCs. He congratulates them,
says something about how this was all according to plan, and teleports them back
to Kintargo because heroes "make his bones itch".

The PCs return to their hometown even bigger heroes than they were when they
left. And I mean, this is the end of the campaign - every player should be free
to narrate their a happily ever after for their character.

Those PCs who want to keep helping Ravounel establish itself as a new nation
should have no trouble finding suitable spots in its leadership and
government. They can also just ride off into the sunset in search of new
adventures, or whatever else their players want to do.

When Pathfinder 2nd Edition was published, it had Ravounel as the youngest Inner
Sea nation, and it also had a group named the Firebrands as a significant
faction in the region. This organization is descended from the Silver Ravens and
other freedom fighter groups, and works to combat tyranny and slavery across the
world. Starting the Firebrands is actually a pretty nifty thing for the PCs to
do after the end of this campaign.
