---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels: Adventure 06, Part 1"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - lets-read
    - gurps
    - hells-rebels
---

The Pathfinder Adventure Path formula calls for a campaign to take up six
volumes, and end in a big final boss battle, taking the party from level 1 to
around level 15-17. This can lead to a lot of material that people might
consider "filler", or "padding": extra encounters whose sole purpose is to give
the party the XP and loot they need to hit the "level target" for the next
meaningful part of the campaign.

In the most extreme of cases, there might be a whole _volume_ of an adventure
path that can be comfortably cut out without affecting the adventure's plot and
themes at all. Hell's Rebels happens to be the adventure path where that volume
is the last one.

The first part assumes the PCs will be willing to play the role of ambassadors
despite previous books assuring us they had no formal role in the duchy's new
government. The second retreads a previous mechanic with higher numbers, and
while the third sounds epic ("delve into Hell!") it's a big slog that spends far
too much time breathlessly peering into Barzilai's psyche.

But if you want to follow the formula to the bitter end, adventure 06 is here
for you. The PCs start at level 15 and should be level 17 before going into Hell
for the final delve.

## Alternative: How about No?

If you don't care about the material in this book, both of the campaign's
previous volumes make for excellent stopping points.

Volume 4 already ends with a big and complex delve into the heart of the enemy's
power and a big climatic boss battle during the victory celebration. You can
comfortably end the campaign after that.

Volume 5 extends things a bit with the contract-related quests, but it's still
very much in keeping with the theme of the overall campaign. There's no big boss
battle at the end, but by using it as the final adventure you do get the
satisfaction of _out-lawyering Hell_, and I think there's no better note to end
the game on.

In both cases, you can do a small retcon to the terms of Barzilai's infernal
contract and say he's damned to Hell for eternity if he dies before his
time. This means killing him in volume 4 ends his threat forever.

Now that we saw a couple of good ways to not play this adventure, let's see what
happens if you do.

## Barzilai's Master Plan, For Real This Time

Going back and reading my posts on Adventure One, I see that I kinda glossed
over the details of the ritual Barzilai performed in order to become a genius
loci. Up until now, that wasn't a problem. The only relevant facts were those I
did describe. The rest of the details only become relevant now, and this final
volume retcons a few things in order to give the party a final adventure
hook. Here's the final form of the whole plot:

Barzilai wants to become a Genius Loci, an epic-level "spirit of place", which
would make him immortal and powerful enough to be worshipped. He made a deal
with Mephistopheles for the knowledge of a ritual that would let him undergo the
transformation.

The ritual requires him to rip his own heart out while standing in a place where
the normal flow of the River of Souls is disrupted. There's a place like that
underneath Kintargo, in the form of a non-portable artifact called the Soul
Anchor. The Anchor was created by Mahathallah, a former servant of Pharasma
turned goddess of undeath. Barzilai raided the place during Adventure Two,
killed most of its defenders, and performed his ritual there.

You see, when you die in Golarion what usually happens is that your soul goes to
Pharasma's domain, where the goddess of death will judge you, strip you of your
memories, and send your blank-slate soul to the afterlife plane that matches her
verdict. The Anchor lets those exposed to it bypass all of that and go directly
to the plane that most matches their own inclinations with all memories
intact. That will often result in a direct promotion to some kind of powerful
outsider due to the vagaries of planar metaphysics.

The ritual ensures Barzilai stays in the mortal world and gets promoted to
Genius Loci of Ravounel, but the diabolic contract he signed for it specifies
that only happens at the time of his natural death. If he dies earlier, he will
instead become a devil in Hell, and will spend a while being tortured before the
final transformation can happen.

How long is "a while"? Adventure One tells us it's "the remainder of his natural
life". Adventure Five avoids telling us anything at all even when the players
read the full contract, which makes me think the retcon was already planned
here. And Adventure Six retcons it and tells us he stays in Hell "until Ravounel
becomes a free nation".

That could potentially be _much longer_ than Barzilai's natural life... but hey,
guess what the just did in the previous volume? They made Ravounel into a free
nation!

So as Adventure Six starts, Barzilai has begun his transformation, and the only
way to stop it is to trigger the termination clause of his mephistophelic
contract. They must find his heart and take it to Hell to reunite it with its
owner. But before they can even do that they must spend some time...

## Part 1: Dealing with Devils

As if there hasn't been enough of that already.

In this part of the adventure, Cheliax sends a messenger with a letter from
Queen Abrogail II herself. It's addressed to the "representatives of the Silver
Ravens" and invites them meet with an officially appointed Chelish negotiator to
discuss further ramifications of Kintargo's new situation. The proposed location
of the meeting is the Oakrib Inn, a somewhat fancy establishment close to the
Menador Gap. That's the mountain pass the PCs destroyed in Adventure Three.

The PCs will likely be very distrustful of this, which is reasonable given their
past experience. But the invitation is genuine, and Cheliax plans to only be the
normal amount of sneaky and underhanded in these diplomatic talks.

The _real_ problem is that the Skinsaw Cult in Vyre is still mad at losing a
bunch of members to the PCs during Adventure Four, so they ask for outside help
in the form of a foreign Skinsaw assassin.

### The Chelish Delegation

Cheliax's envoys are led by Ambassador Nereza Rigalio. She's here to do a job,
and she will do it by the book. She's courteous to the PC and honest about her
mission and motives, which are to squeeze as many commercial and diplomatic
concessions they can from the PCs. They plan to do it through honest negotiation
too, save for a single bit of skulduggery after the first day.

Nereza has a devil bodyguard and three apprentices with her. The devil is only
here for protection and won't talk at all if he can help it. The apprentices are
annoying Ermelind, star-struck Saybel (who will ask for an autograph from the PC
bard, if there is any) and quiet Athtinia.

### The Ravounel Delegation

Despite having no official role in the new administration, the book assumes the
PCs will take on the job of envoys for this summit, and advises the GM to make
their allies pressure them into it if they seem reluctant.

The party is a credible in-character choice if they include one or more capable
socialites among their number, and can collectively produce good scores in the
three social skills (Bluff, Intimidation and Diplomacy). If they don't you might
want to make up an NPC delegation from your current roster of allies, and have
them hire the party as their security detail. Friendly Kintargan nobles and
named "social" allies like Shensen and Mantisse make good choices for this.

### The Assassin

Bejakra is a life-long worshipper of Norgorber in his Father Skinsaw
aspect. She's probably the most powerful assassin in the continent at level 18,
and these days travels between cult cells offering her services. When she got to
Vyre, they asked her for help in taking revenge on the PCs. Her mission is to
infiltrate the talks, kill the Chelish ambassador, and frame the PCs for the
murder.

Back in Adventure Two, the PCs recovered an evil kukri named Balgorrah. If they
failed to destroy it, by say selling it off instead of handing it to a proper
disposal expert, then it makes an appearance here. The cult managed to acquire
it and restore it to full power, and they give it to Bejakra as part of the
payment for this job. If the PCs did destroy the weapon, then she will have a
much less impressive magic kukri instead.

### Negotiation Mechanics

If you're going with NPC envoys, you can narrate the results of the negotiation
as you wish. It might be a good idea to make them conditional on how well the
PCs handle the murder attempt. Otherwise it's skill challenge time!

Each of the five issues Nereza wishes to discuss has a description and an
influence DC. The description outlines Cheliax's initial (and totally
unreasonable) position on the issue.

The PCs then make one roll of each of the three social skills against that
DC. The more successes they have, the more favorable the final deal is on that
issue. If the PCs get two or more successes they get a special benefit in the
second part of the adventure, and if they get less they get a penalty. And the
actual terms negotiated also affect Kintargo's history going forward, of course.

The issues are what you'd expect: a trade deal so Cheliax can keep getting those
nice Kintargan exports, a couple of softballs regarding mutual scholarly access
to historical treasures and repairing the Menador gap, and the harder issues of
a military alliance and nonagression pact which are intended to prevent Ravounel
from attacking Cheliax directly and keep it obligated to join Chelish wars. The
PCs really want to have lots of successes on these last two.


### Timeline

Soon after the PCs agree to attend the talks, the cult learns of them through
divination. They dispatch Bejakra to the Oakrib Inn. She arrives several days
before either party and uses her abilities and magic items to kill and
impersonate the inn's groundskeeper.

The Chelish negotiators arrive on the scheduled day, early in the
morning. Nereza greets the PCs in person if they're already there, or leaves a
polite note for them if they arrive later.

Negotiations are to last for as many days as it takes to settle all outstanding
issues. They start in the late afternoon of each day, with each session lasting
for 2-3 hours and discussing at most two issues. The Chelish delegation will
pick up the inn's food and lodging bill for the whole period of the talks.

If all goes to plan, the trade deal gets discussed on Day 1, the softballs on
Day 2, and the military agreements on Day 3. That's a big "if", though.

In the first night after negotiations begin, Athtinia will visit the PCs in
secret and offer them bribes to "throw' the negotiations. She says she's doing
this without Nereza's knowledge.

This is actually a Chelish tactic known as "testing the waters". The bribes are
lies, and will never be delivered. Instead, Athtinia will report on the PCs'
reactions to Nereza, who will use the information to shape her arguments in
coming days. The key here is to be perceptive enough to realize this, which will
throw Nereza off her game enough that the DC remains unchanged (or even gets
reduced if the PCs tattle on Athtinia, as Nereza will respect them for it).

In the second night, at 3 AM, Bejakra makes her move. She uses magic items to
summon three jorogumo and station then at key points as lookouts. Then she takes
the shape of a PC and wall-walks on the outside of the inn to Nereza's room,
entering through a window. She kills the ambassador with her assassin abilities,
which ensure she can't be brought back by Raise Dead. She makes sure this is
_noticed_, too, so that the devil bodyguard and the rest of Nereza's entourage
can see the shape of a PC standing over her body. Then she makes a fighting
retreat and vanishes.

Bejakra's Stealth skill is so high the PCs have little chance of noticing her
sneaking towards Nereza's bedroom. They best shot at stopping the murder before
it happens is to pierce through her groundskeeper disguise during the first or
second day. This is doable because her Bluff skill is not that high for a level
18 character, and her magic disguise uses low-level spells the party shouldn't
have a problem detecting and dispelling if they think to look for them at all.

Failing that, they'll certainly hear the commotion and might be able to
help during the fight... despite the other side trying to attack them because
_they_ can't pierce the magical disguise.

Whether it's on that night or the following morning, the survivors will angrily
confront the PCs, accusing them of the murder. Here, the _last_ thing the PCs
want to do is start a fight, since that will definitely ruin the talks for
good. Instead, they should prove their innocence. They can try a Diplomacy check
for this, which starts out stupidly hard but becomes easier the more evidence
they can produce, from circumstantial arguments right up to Bejakra's
corpse. Failure means a fight, but even a success will still leave the
delegation wary, with Athtinia taking up the lead and increasing influence DCs
by 10.

The very best outcome would be to either prevent Nereza from dying in the first
place or using Resurrection to bring her back (something the PCs should be able
to do at this level if they have a cleric in the party at all). In the latter
case she's so grateful the PCs gain an automatic success in _all_ negotiations,
even the ones they already finished.

Yes, it's technically better to let Nereza be assassinated and then resurrect
her than it is to prevent her death in the first place. But if a PC tries this
on purpose, you'll be sure they read the adventure in advance.

If the talks haven't been completely ruined, negotiations proceed until they
finish, and the treaty is signed at the end of the last session. If Nereza is
particularly impressed with the PCs she will gift them her ruby and mithral
bracelet, which is completely mundane but is important to the plot in part 2.
