---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels Adventure 06, Part 03"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - lets-read
    - gurps
    - hells-rebels
---

In the last part of this adventure, the PCs had to yet again liberate each
district of Kintargo from the specter of Barzilai Thrune, though this time the
"specter" part was quite literal. This gave them a series of visions that
revealed the location of the Soul Anchor, the artifact site where Thrune's heart
is currently stored.

By now the PCs have almost certainly learned what Barzilai's master plan is. The
whole thing was laid out in the infernal contract he signed with Mephistopheles
to make it all possible, which the PCs recovered in Adventure 05. If they didn't
read the entire thing back then (a skill challenge of sorts), doing that now
will get all the details. I'm not gonna repeat it all here, I've done that
enough.

Part 03 of the adventure is about reaching the Soul Anchor and retrieving
Barzilai's still-beating heart from it. Reuniting the heart with the rest of him
in Hell is the key to stopping his transformation.

## What the Heck is a Soul Anchor?

Detailed information on the Soul Anchor can be obtained from the notes of the
serial killer they stopped in the previous adventure. In short, it's an immobile
artifact created by an asshole infernal demigoddess of deception and undeath to
spite Pharasma, the goddess of death. Those exposed to its energies get to
retain their memories (and powers!) after Pharasma judges them, which doesn't
normally happen. This can let them become powerful outsiders right from the
start instead of spending some eons as a blank-slate petitioner first.

The goddess itself doesn't seem to mind this one way or the other, but her
divine and mortal servants hate Soul Anchors and destroy every one they can
find.

This one is located in the Underdark under Kintargo, in the middle of a shrine
called the Soulbound Fane. It used to be guarded by a powerful cult of
Mahatallah (the asshole demigoddess), but Barzilai rolled in with an army back
in Adventure 02 while the PCs cleared out their new hideout. He killed the
cultists, performed the Heart's Harvest ritual inside the Anchor, and left his
heart behind with a contingent of his own guards.

The visions the PCs got from clearing out Barzilai's haunts point them towards
the quickest route to the shrine: a hidden elevator in the Kintargo
cemetery. The shrine is hidden from conventional divination, which is why it's
still standing. If you skipped the whole haunt rigmarole, you could have the
elevator mentioned in the Temple Hill Slasher's notes the PCs got in Adventure
05.

## Delving the Soulbound Fane

The **elevator** is itself an intelligent magical item. It requires a mildly
squicky bit of self-mutilation or a decent Use Magical Device check to activate,
and on the ride down will answer questions about the people who rode it in the
past. It's not very helpful, though, as it thinks all flesh beings look alike.

The elevator stops in a huge **cave** 2000 feet below the surface. It used to be
the lair of Adrakash, a red dragon cultist whose job was to guard the shrine,
but Barzilai and his army killed it during their raid. The dragon's frustration
and his long exposure to the Soul Anchor caused him to rise as an dragon-sized
wraith that combines all those delightful wraith powers with a generous helping
of Fuck You I'm A Dragon. Fortunately for the PCs, Adrakash can't use some of
his more cheaty powers and hasn't had the chance to create any lesser wraiths.

Defeating Adrakash lets the party press forward. But first'we loot the room!
There's a bunch of obsolete equipment and a bag with some handy consumables
scattered around the floor. Up on a ledge, however, lies the true prize: the
dragon's hoard. Aside from the usual piles of money and extravagant art objects,
there is lots of _very_ nice magic weapons and armor.

Next up is **The Shadow Gulf**, a winding path over a bottomless chasm where
Barzilai left two Shadow Golems as guardians. This is a new monster statted out
in this book: a big sturdy construct made of solid shadow that can walk on air,
hit hard, breathe a cone of strenght-draining shadow, and has an iron golem's
magic immunity. Shadow spells buff it, light spells slow it down. The terrain is
probably the greatest challenge here at the party's level.

After that comes **The Soulbound Facade**, the temple's antechamber. This is
where its defenders had their last stand. Most of them were shunted to their
afterlife with memories intact, but Mahatallah decided to punish the cult's
leader Nasperiah with undeath instead, turning her into a powerful ghost that
retains all of her cleric powers.

Said ghost will challenge the party as soon as they enter, and order them to
leave on pain of death. This gives them the opportunity to talk to her, and
maybe even make her an ally if they can convince her they're also enemies of
Thrune. This is very useful, because there's a boss fight awaiting them at the
Anchor's chamber.

Before that, though, they must go through a room containing the **Font of
Visions**, a minor artifact that lets the operator scry on nearly anyone in
existence, and maybe even read their minds. It's so dangerous to non-worshippers
of Mahatallah it's not worth the risk, but maybe they can convince Nasperiah to
check how Barzilai is doing in Hell.

The next chamber is the largest in the whole temple, and contains the **Soul
Anchor**, an immobile energy vortex. Barzilai's heart can be seen floating in
the middle of the thing. It's guarded by Anagondun, who is something called a
"nemesis devil" and one of Mephistopheles' favorite servants. It helped Barzilai
complete the ritual and stayed behind to guard his heart.

If you believe Pathfinder 1e's CR system, Anagondun is stronger than the
dragon. He has a bunch of divine spells, some of which he got from his hobby of
posing as a false idol in some other world. He'll do everything he can to
prevent the PCs from yoinking the heart, including surrouding the Anchor with a
Wall of Stone.

To complicate matters, the heart causes the Anchor to emanate corrupt energies
that act as a powerful debuff to anyone who fails their save and are
particularly harmful to Nasperiah. Anagondun, of course, is immune. Scattered
throughout the chamber are ever-refilling pools of liquid sacred to Mahatallah,
which do provide Nasperiah with useful buffs if she stands inside but are
horrible traps to the PCs and the devil.

## To the Victor Go the Spoils

After the fight, the PCs can take the heart by simply reaching into the Anchor
and pulling it out. This will expose the PC in question to the Anchor. The only
way to avoid this is to have a summoned creature take the Heart, as it only
responds to the touch of living flesh. Tools or TK spells won't work. Of course,
since exposure causes the PCs to retain their memories after they die, you might
get the whole party trying to touch the thing.

Nasperiah, if she's still around, probably doesn't mind them doing that, and
will of course gladly let the PCs leave with the Heart. In addition to the
dragon's hoard out in the cave, they get enough XP to reach level 17 _or_ one
tier of mythic power. The adventure as written doesn't assume the PCs get
mythic, but if you want them to this would be the time to do it.
