---
layout: post
title: "Historical Campaigns Make Me Anxious"
tags:
    - gurps
    - general
    - opinion
---

Not _clinically_ anxious; they don't give me panic attacks or anything. But they
make me uneasy enough that I don't find them fun on either side of the GM
screen, no matter how hard I try. What follows is all based on my own personal
opinions and feelings, obviously, and not any sort of absolute objective truth.

No matter what the period covered by a historical game is, I feel I can never
know enough to do it justice. Everyone else involved in the game inevitably
knows much more about it than I do, and I fear my ignorant fumbling will drag
the game down for everyone. If I'm a player I will inevitably make a PC who
would be considered an absolute freak for the time, and if that doesn't happen
from the start I will eventually behave in a way that will make it happen. If
I'm the GM I will inevitably get something wrong that a more knowledgeable
player sees as obvious.

As a player, this unease is augmented by a persistent feeling of doom,
particularly when the goal of the campaign is to experience a "more hopeful
time". This is history! We know what happens next, and it mostly ain't
good. Even the "more hopeful" part is so relative I have a hard time accepting
it. Victorian England is full of elegance, sophistication and optimism... if
you're a wealthy European. The fun and light-hearted Age of Pulp is inevitably
followed by a worldwide economic crisis, the rise of fascism, and WWII, which
loom large in my mind even if the campaign is meant to end in 1928[^1]. For the
same reason I have a real hard time building such a "hopeful" campaign as the
GM.

So yeah, I know enough about the big picture for the periods usually covered in
historical games that I have a hard time considering any of them "hopeful", and
at the same time I know little enough that I can't do them justice.

If the game in question happens to be Call of Cthulhu, then... well, the kindest
fate in store for your PC there is that they suffer enough permanent mental
damage that they won't notice some Great Old One or other is eating the
world. So that's a double serving of unease right there.

All of this is why I tend to prefer games set either in entirely fictional
settings and/or in The Future(TM). Fictional settings have an entirely invented
history, when they have history at all. Even if the local culture is based on
real-world historical people, I feel I have a bit more space to change things,
either intentionally or due to some accidental mistake. I don't need to have
extensive knowledge of 10th-century Scandinavia to play in Nordlond, because
Nordlond isn't on Earth and its vikings aren't Earth vikings.

Future settings might reuse real-world history up to the "present time", but
everything that happens afterwards is essentially fictional and as malleable as
the information from a fully fictional setting. Also, the future is by
definition unwritten! Sure, a big war could be brewing, but who's to say your
PCs aren't going to be the ones to stop it? History is a lot easier to defy when
it hasn't happened yet. This is part of the reason why I think people who make
their cyberpunk settings into complete dystopias are missing the point, and why
I dislike "default" Warhammer 40000 so much. Fight-back fiction is where it's
at.


[^1]: Like Victorian England, it's also only fun for a very limited number of
    people, which is why every modern pulp game includes an aside on how to
    avoid the racism and sexism prevalent at the time.

[^2]: Sometimes that's because the author is me.
