So where does Iron Gods come into this story? I'll get there in a minute! First
I need to tell you how Castle Ravenloft defeated the players.

I don't think the group actually realized how close they were to winning. It was
almost entirely a psychological defeat. The place was scary and unknown, the
random encounters hard, and they spent the first couple of sessions treating it
like a Diablo dungeon ("run in as fast as possible and kill everything that
moves!"). After that, they became overly cautious, retreating to the chapel
every couple of fights to spend the night and let those healing penalties fade.

They'd inevitably wake up to a random encounter. No, undead can't enter the
chapel, but those two rust monsters I rolled up that one time sure could! They
didn't wreck any equipment, but they scared the players just the same.

This became the usual pattern of our sessions, and if it kept up the group would
end up allowing the monsters to slowly grind them to death. I told them as much,
and cautioned them to explore the castle in a more directed and organized manner
if they wanted to win.

That led to a rather fruitful session where they moved with purpose and reached
the room where Strahd's maid lived. She pleaded for help and offered to lead
them to a stash of treasure in exchange for help in escaping the castle. The PCs
agreed.

She led them up the stairs, staying towards the back of the group for
safety. When they reached the "treasure room", the maid sprouted claws and fangs
and backstabbed the party, because of course she was a vampire and the treasure
was fake.

They managed to defeat the vampire maid without suffering too much damage, and
it turned out that all of this happened right in front of the door to the throne
room, where I6's tarot reading told me Strahd himself could be found.

So there they were, mostly unhurt, with a cleric and a paladin in the party, in
possession of both the Icon of Ravenloft and the Sunsword, literally at Strahd's
doorstep. What did the PCs do? They broke and ran. The rest of the session was
them finding their way to the outside, still at the second floor, levitating
over the walls and making it back to Barovia.

We ended the session there, and we wouldn't get to play another. One of the
players outright told me Ravenloft was too hard, so I offered to switch to Iron
Gods the next session with a fresh batch of characters. No one else complained
or offered a dissenting opinion, so I guess they agreed. Ravenloft had claimed
another party.

[1]: {{ "/projects/hells-rebels.html" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/projects/pathfinder-iconics.html" | relative_url }}
