---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Hell's Rebels 04, Part 01"
tags:
    - pathfinder
    - lets-read
    - gurps
    - hells-rebels
---

The first three volumes of this adventure path were dedicated to building up the
Silver Ravens and their rebellion. Strikes against Thrune were indirect and
targeted peripheral facilities, which prevented the enemy from mounting a big
response.

All of this changes at the very end of Adventure 03, where Barzilai lays a
deadly trap for the PCs and potentially kills a lot of innocents. At the start
of this one, Barzilai Thrune makes his final three proclamations: he outlaws the
Silver Ravens, he forbids worship of any god that's not Asmodeus, and he
blockades the bridge that separates the two halves of the city. As soon as this
happens, his forces begin a brutal series of reprisals against the Ravens and
the population in general.

The Silver Ravens immediately begin to fight back, since at this point their
rebellion has reached its maximum power and anyone who was even a little
sympathetic to them throws their full support behind the organization.

In summary, [shit's going down][1].

PCs start this adventure at level 10 and are expected to finish halfway into
level 13.

## GMing the Rebellion

The bulk of this adventure is dedicated to commanding the full might of the
rebellion to topple Barzilai Thrune. While you might have been able to ignore
the custom rebellion rules up until now, they're unavoidable here. If you didn't
bother with them before the book suggests assigning a default set of stats for
the organization (Notoriety 75%, focused stat +15, secondary stats +10). Those
numbers are higher than what's on the Player Guide, probably to account for
bonuses the PCs would have gotten if they kept track of things in detail. Even
if you were using detailed rules before I recommend upgrading the org's stats to
at least that level.

Now that Thrune's government can be "killed", it gets stats of its own. The
important one is Authority, which must be brought down to 0 for the Ravens to
win. When that happens, Thrune and his remaining lackeys lock themselves up in
the Temple of Asmodeus for a last-ditch desperation move, and the PCs can get at
them with a final assault.

The PCs and the Silver Ravens fight the Thrune government by completing
missions. These usually involve raids against important facilities controlled by
named villains. Success at these usually removes whatever capabilities that
villain brought into play, and gives the Silver Ravens control of the city
district they're in. Districts under Raven control become safe from patrols and
such, and lower both current and maximum Authority by a certain amount (10 or 20
points, depending on the district). This is why I linked the Assassin's Creed:
Brotherhood trailer above.

Thrune's government tries to resist the rebellion through brutal reprisals
against the Ravens and the population in general. They can launch one such
reprisal per day for every 25 Authority or fraction thereof they have. Specific
reprisals are rolled out of a d100 table. The best possible result here is "No
Reprisal", an organizational snafu that actually decreases Thrune's
Authority. The other events result from mere defamation or increased patrols all
the way to a dragon air strike, each one increasing Authority by an amount
proportional to its badness. As Authority drops and named villains are killed,
some of these entries will be removed and replaced with No Reprisal. Can't have
a dragon attack if the dragon is dead! Authority also increased by 1d6 at the
start of every day, to represent the population's and the Ravens' war weariness.

The problem with those reprisal events is that they also kill some of the city's
population. While the chance that the PCs will lose the game at this stage is
small, they must act quickly and forcefully to prevent Thrune from doing too
much damage to the city they're trying to protect.

Authority starts at 100 by default, but past Silver Raven victories in previous
adventures can reduce this starting amount. A "perfect run" means allying with
both the sea elves and Vyre; destroying Menador keep _and_ stealing the
documents kept there; and finishing the Ruby Masquerade with 20 or more Masque
Points. This would mean Thrune starts this adventure with Authority at 65/100,
giving the PCs a major starting advantage.


## The Missions

The default expectation here is that the PCs managed to win the battle at the
opera house and fully explore it at the end of the last adventure. If this is
the case, the adventure starts with an emergency meeting of the Silver Council
taking place as soon as the PCs are recovered, to update them on the state of
the rebellion and explain the available district control missions.

If on the other hand the PCs _lost_ the opera house battle, they wake up in a
cell in Kintargo Keep, and must escape. They basically tackle the hardest
mission first, from the inside out, and then add the Opera House to their to-do
list later - it's still full of stuff vital to their success.

Most of the missions consist of relatively short dungeon raids that are
essentially big set-piece battles against the villain of the hour and their
minions. These encounters tend to all be CR 13. This is where the game
introduces a new monster type, the Troop, which works a lot like a 4e Swarm but
occupies an area that's more "malleable" than the standard square. There are
Dottari and Inquisitor troops here, representing the fact that Thrune's security
forces are out in well, force.

As I mentioned above, PCs can order the Ravens to perform support actions before
every dungeon raid instead of just at the end of every week. If the named
villains in each one manage to survive and escape, they'll likely join Thrune at
the Temple of Asmodeus. Even if this happens, they still count as defeated for
district-taking purposes.

This is the mission list:

### Rescue Hetamon (Jarvis End District)

Hetamon Haace is the Rose of Kintargo, and one of the members of the Silver
Ravens. He became an ally and a member of the Silver Council back in adventure
02, but is missing from this adventure's emergency meeting. Finding him is a
priority.

Turns out he's been kidnapped by his evil half-succubus sorceress of a mother,
who is holed up in the basement of Shensen's former home and plans to sell him
to Thrune in exchange for some sort of cushy job or at least a license to hunt
people in Kintargo. She has a bevy of minions both voluntary and enslaved. The
former consist of a covey of hags; some of the latter can be freed instead of
fought.

Shensen can give the PCs the full layout of her own basement, of course. And if
she comes along the PCs might also recruit her best friend who is hiding in
there, a sapient dinosaur rogue!

Completing this one and reconsecrating the basement as a shrine to Sarenrae
gives PCs control of Jarvis End.

### Take the Records Hall (The Greens District)

The Records Hall is full of important information about the city and its
inhabitants, and denying this to Thrune will be a major blow to his forces. It's
also the current lair of Tiarise Izoni, the witch responsible for most
atrocities of an arcane nature committed so far in the campaign. Opposition here
consists of the witch, two inquisitor troops, and two invisible stalkers.

Tiarise's notes can give the PCs clues about Thrune's ultimate plan for
immortality, and also alert them to the fact she has performed a ritual on
herself that will turn her into a powerful undead creature when she dies. Unless
she is killed under specific circumstances, Tiarise returns in the last
adventure in undead form as one of its named villains.

### Bleakbridge (Yolubilis Harbor District)

The bridge is blockaded by a huge force of dottari (three troops, two captains,
a named commander). They're being helped by a gang of tengu named the River
Talons, who are acting as lookouts. Fortunately, their alliance is shaky and the
Talons' leader is the brother of Silver Council Member Chok (a weapon shop owner
who joins at the start of this adventure). If the PCs can arrange a meeting
between Chok and his brother, the latter can be convinced to betray the
dottari. In that case, the Talons will not raise the alarm when the PCs sneak
into the bridge, and will take care of one of the dottari troops "offscreen".

Sneaking into the bridge is possible at all because it's huge - there are
actually buildings on both sides, with plenty of space to cross in the middle.

### Skinsaw Assassins (Villegre or Redroof Districts)

These cultists are led by Hei-fen, the spiteful and vengeful wererat who has it
in for the PCs. The PCs are warned about them by Molly Mayapple, the helpful and
grateful wererat from Vyre.

The cultists will attack the PCs in three separate occasions, possibly while
they're busy with something else. The first strike is six cultists, the second
one a jorogumo, and the final one another twelve cultists, another jorogumo, and
Hei-fen herself. They're also doing murders for Thrune on the side.

Eliminating all of them changes the corresponding reprisal table entry to "No
Reprisal", and gives the city enough breathing room for the PCs to take control
of either Villegre or Redroof.

### Kintargo Keep (Castle District)

This is where Thrune's most important political prisoners are being kept. If the
PCs have been captured at the end of the last adventure, they start here and
must escape. Otherwise, this will probably be the last place they hit. The keep
and castle are much less guarded than usual because Barzilai ordered most of the
troops stationed here to go out and hunt for the PCs, which ironically lets them
approach the Keep.

While the tower has five levels, only the ground floor and basement are truly
relevant. When the PCs attack the tower is being guarded by six Hellknights of
the Rack and their leader, Paralictor Kyrre Ekodyre. The knights should spot the
PCs as soon as they make it past the door, so they will eventually need to deal
with all of them and the paralictor in the same fight. There are some undead
knights possessing suits of armor guarding a shrine, but they will not join the
main fight.

The keep's archives contain the contracts Barzilai made with the order of the
Rack, to transfer all of the assets of the Order of the Torrent to them (back in
adventure 02). Turns out there are a lot of irregularities in these contracts
and the Hellknights, who are Lawful-Eviler-than-thou, will abandon Thrune once
these documents are made public. This will remove them from all random and
pre-arranged encounters!

The archives also contain prisoner records showing that Jackdaw, the original
leader of the Silver Ravens, is still here! House Thrune's redaction efforts
were so effective that not even Barzilai or the knights remember why she was
important.

Jackdaw is being held in a special cell in the basement, behind a secret
door. She's guarded by a being known as the First Warden, a former warpriest of
Asmodeus who was turned into a lich and bound to this prison as a punishment for
some forgotten transgression. The Warden will at first attempt to talk to the
PCs because it's been a long time since she had a proper conversation, but will
attack when she realizes they're here to free Jackdaw. She has a lot of priestly
abilities and the help of four more of those possessed armors.

Jackdaw is in a pretty sorry state - the lich has kept her from dying, but
hasn't done anything to make her comfortable. Once the PCs restore her health
and sanity, she becomes a very valuable ally. She can also supply them with the
lyrics for the Song of Silver, which combined with the score from the opera
house allows the PCs to use the ritual.

### The Dragon (Villegre or Redroof District)

I did mention a dragon, didn't I? She's an adult blue dragon named Rivozair. She
first attacked the city during the Chelish civil war, and was nearly killed by
the original Silver Ravens. Rivozair returned shortly before the campaign
started and agreed to join up with Barzilai for a chance to take revenge on the
city. He invested her with additional infernal power, binding her to a horned
devil in the same way Nox from Adventure 01 was bound to a bearded one.

Rivozair is a powerhouse of a solo boss, and one of Barzilai's most powerful
minions. In addition to her usual "I'm a dragon!" suite of abilities, her
lightning breath has been replaced with hellfire, she can summon barbed devils,
and she has Regeneration 5 that can only be overcome by Good-aligned spells and
weapons (though that last bit shouldn't be a problem at this point). After the
PCs finish the other five missions, or after they reduce Barzilai's Authority to
0 (whatever happens first), the dragon will be unleashed to hunt down and kill
the PCs directly.

If the GM wants to make this battle a bit easier, they can have some of the PC's
allies help in the fight. If on the other hand they want to make it harder, they
can have the dragon begin its hunt earlier than scheduled. Rivozair will try to
become invisible and run away when she's badly wounded, but instead of rallying
at the Temple she will flee the region. She might come back to disrupt the
victory celebration, if the GM wishes. Otherwise she will remove herself from
the campaign.

Defeating Rovizair removes her entry from the reprisal table... but more
importantly it _instantly reduces Authority to 0_. I guess any remaining minions
will see that the PCs can handle the dragon and will immediately leave their
posts as if they had been defeated, rallying at the Temple of Asmodeus. We now
enter the final stage of the adventure.

## Conclusion

And that brings this post to a close. There's actually little I would cut from
this part of the adventure, since all of the fights here seem pretty cool. When
playing in Pathfinder, they are also quite amenable to alpha-strike tactics.

In the next post, we'll take a look at the effects of the Song of Silver and at
the Temple of Asmodeus, which unlike these short raids is a huge grinding slog.


[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzNs4-kRLaE
