---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dungeon Fantasy Roleplaying Game!"
tags:
    - gurps
    - lets-read
---

If you only read this blog through the GURPS Day feed, you might not know I've
done a series of extensive "Let's Read" projects of all the D&D 4th Edition
Monster Manuals and the Neverwinter Campaign Setting. I like those projects!
They were pretty easy to write for.

However, since none of its posts are GURPS articles, they don't get into the
feed and I don't announce them on the GURPS-only forums and social networks I
frequent. And I really want something that can appear there regularly.

I have a whole bunch of more "serious" posts I want to write but I find myself
making no progress at all with them. I need something that flows more easily
from brain to keyboard, something I can get out there regularly, something
that's fun to write.

So Let's Read the Dungeon Fantasy Roleplaying Game! This post will introduce you
to the dungeon fantasy genre and to this game in particular.

If you're a long-time reader of this blog, you already know all of this! But I'm
going to cross-post this to RPG.net, and a lot of readers from there won't, so
let's recap a bit.

## What Is Dungeon Fantasy?

"Dungeon Fantasy" is the name Steve Jackson Games invented to describe the very
specific sub-genre of fantasy that Dungeons & Dragons arguably created. It's
probably the most popular genre in the tabletop RPG hobby, though people tend
lump it in with the broader "fantasy" or "medieval fantasy" because the
"dungeon" aspect is usually so ubiquitous it's invisible[^1].

At the core of it, dungeon fantasy is about a band of adventurers going into
dungeons to kill monsters and loot treasure. It can certainly feature other
things, like the intrigue, melodrama, and worldbuilding that makes so many
settings, stories and campaigns memorable... but that particular activity is
still your core gameplay loop. At some point in a dungeon fantasy story, your
group is going to delve a dungeon that has both hostile monsters and treasure.

## What is the DFRPG?

The Dungeon Fantasy Roleplaying Game is a tabletop RPG released by Steve Jackson
Games in 2017, after a successful Kickstarter campaign. This is a "Powered by
GURPS" title, which means it uses GURPS rules as a base but _does not_ require
any GURPS books to play, and may have different _base assumptions_ from those in
core GURPS.

I wrote a review of the game back in 2017 when I acquired it. As I said in that
review, [DFRPG is my second-favorite edition of D&D][2]. It's by far the
chunkiest Powered By GURPS title: while most others consist of a single book,
this one is a boxed set with five hardcover books inside:

- **Adventurers**, which is your Player's Handbook with nearly everything you
  need to make a character.

- **Spells** contains the magic system and all the spells used in the game. You
  need this if you're playing a caster.

- **Exploits**, which is your Game Master's Guide with everything you need to
  run the game.

- **Monsters**, which is your Monster Manual. We'll certainly be in familiar
  territory when we get here!

- **I Smell A Rat** is an introductory adventure for starting delvers, with some
  twists since "starting delvers" means something quite different here than it
  does in D&D.

There's a lot to cover here, so some posts might end up being a bit light on
detail. Hopefully, though, I'll manage to convey the gist of the system to
someone who is not familiar with it.


[^1]: There are plenty of "non-dungeon" fantasy games out there, of course, but
    we won't be talking about them in this particular series.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2017/08/25/dfrpg-review.html" | relative_url }}
