---
layout: post
title: "Let's Play Hell's Rebels: Adjusting Setting Assumptions"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - lets-play
    - hells-rebels
    - gm-hat
---

It's time for me to put on my GM hat and begin preparing my solo Hell's Rebels
campaign. As mentioned in the [previous post][1], I want to play this using the
GURPS Dungeon Fantasy rule set instead of the campaign's native Pathfinder
1e. Let's take a look at what this means.

## The Setting

As we all know by now, Hell's Rebels takes place in Golarion, Pathfinder's
setting. Golarion was built from the ground up to support dungeon fantasy
campaigns so we don't have any fundamental friction between it and the Dungeon
Fantasy rules. Despite the many D&D-isms of Pathfinder's first edition we
already know the setting can easily be used with other systems, since it has an
official Savage Worlds port and Paizo itself is in the process of removing those
D&D-isms from the latest iteration of their system.

That being said, I do want to make a few changes to the version I'm going to
use. The most obvious one is I'm going to drop the many different fiend
classifications from D&D and Pathfinder in favor of Dungeon Fantasy's
simplified "it's all demons from Hell". Any of the demons from DF will be fair
game as opposition here.

And since I'm talking about setting changes, any mention I find of Cheliax's
fascists and diabolists being in any way "disciplined" or "organized" despite
their evil will be altered because incompetence, corruption, and a disregard for
any rules lies at the heart of fascism. These fucks do not make the trains run
on time and never have. You do not, at any point, gotta hand it to them.

I also want to lean on the similarities between this campaign and Assassin's
Creed Brotherhood, so we'll be at a Renaissance tech level with early guns
widely available to guards and rebels. Make ready your blessed bullets, o devil
hunters.

## The Mechanics

I think this will mostly be pretty simple, because this won't be the first time
I'm converting between Pathfinder and DF. I did already run the first two
volumes of Hell's Rebels and the first three volumes of Iron Gods to different
player groups. During those times two issues jumped at me as being the most
difficult to handle.

The first one was treasure conversions, but I think I've arrived at a satisfying
process for that [in this post][2]. Our delvers will eventually end up very
wealthy, but I imagine the rebellion will prove to be a great money sink.

The other difficulty concerns the only somewhat common part of the dungeon
delving experience that's harder to do in Dungeon Fantasy than in D&D:
underwater adventures. In Pathfinder, you can get potions or scrolls of Water
Breathing for a relatively cheap price, and the effect lasts about 1 hour. In
GURPS, the spell lasts for 1 minute before needing to be maintained, and there
doesn't seem to be a potion or scroll version of it already statted up. Items
that let you breathe water when worn are _extremely_ expensive despite their
relatively limited usefulness.

So my challenge here, if I want to run the underwater portions of Adventure 02
and 03, is to gather all the relevant GURPS rules in one place and come up with
a way for our intrepid adventurers to spend a long time underwater. Again, doing
this on a schedule stressed me out, but I might manage if I do it at my own
pace. It will provide us with some nice blogging material if nothing else.

Monster conversions used to be a big problem back when I started the Let's Read,
but now I have enough DF monster books that I can swipe appropriate stat blocks
for nearly every one of them. If I need to create new ones for specific foes,
you can be sure I'll post them here. I will however

## Coming Up Next

Let's see if we can solve that underwater conundrum.

[1]:

[2]: {{ "/2023/06/25/dungeon-fantasy-wealth.html" | relative_url }}
