---
layout: post
title: "Jade Irinka, the Sixth Raven"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - character
    - lets-play
    - hells-rebels
---

Jade Irinka was an orphan of uncertain but numinous parentage who was adopted as
a sort of mascot by the original Silver Ravens during their early exploits. She
was too young to go out with the Ravens on their missions, but she witnessed
their results and listened to their stories with rapt attention. Jackdaw,
knowing victory would be uncertain in the final Thrune invasion, sent her away
from the city with other non-combatant friends, hoping they would be able to
come back once the fighting was over.

Things didn't turn out well, and Jade never got the chance to return. She aged
slowly but eventually reached maturity and set out to follow on the footsteps of
her heroes. Her incredible natural charisma was soon supplemented by an almost
supernatural skill with the sword and she achieved some small measure of renown
around the Inner Sea as an heroic adventurer.

Recent news from Cheliax convinced Jade it's finally time to return home and
take up the Ravens' fight. She doesn't remember many details about those days,
but she's confident she will find a way. Everything she's done so far has been
to prepare herself for this. As the campaign starts, she has just caught up on
the events and rumors of the last few days and decides to attend the Aria Park
protest to learn more.

## Build notes

Jade's stats below are based on the Aristocrat archetype from GURPS Dungeon
Fantasy Denizens: Swashbucklers. This gives her amazing sword and leadership
skills, though I removed some of the template's more classist traits. Her being
a long-lived non-human is mostly a story thing for now, as I didn't take an
official racial template.

Her name is taken from Chuubo's Marverlous Wish-Granting Engine, where it
belonged to the Angel of the Sun. She's also partly inspired by Princess
Celestia. I used her in Zeitgeist too, where she was an eladrin (also without a
template). Here, the closest equivalent might be an elf with an azata celestial
heritage, which is actually possible as a starting PC in Pathfinder 2. You can
use these stats for a charismatic human swashbuckler in some other campaign
without changing any numbers.

In terms of advancement, I'm hoping to spend earned points to max out her
Charisma, Born War-Leader talent, and perhaps even Appearance. She's going to be
the public face of the rebellion, after all. Holiness and its attendant powers
are also not out of the question, as they'd make her even better at fighting
demons.

## Character Sheet
