# Long time no see!

It's been a year! There are a lot of reasons for my large delay in updating
this. For the first little while after I finished writing the Aria Park scene, I
was just so dang satisfied with myself I didn't feel the need to play more just
yet. You don't know how long I had that scene stuck in my head, and it was so
nice to finally game it out.

After I started thinking about what to do next, I pretty soon ran into a major
creative block stemming from a lack of battle maps. It kinda affected me when I
was running stuff for other people over Roll20 too.

I can make lines on a blank canvas, but I'm not an artist, and stacking up my
squiggles against the ready-made maps I also used made me very self-conscious. I
finally broke through that by finding a tool that would let me draw
decent-looking maps.

No, it's not AI, and if you thought it was I'm disappointed in you. I just
decided to spend some money on a copy of Dungeondraft once I found out it runs
just fine on Linux. It has a huge library of textures and placeables that let me
make pretty spiffy maps by hand. Sure, they'll end up a bit standardized, but
that's still way better than my squiggles. It only uses square grids but I can
export the images without a grid and let Foundry handle the hexes.

That gave me lots of ideas right away, but it was a relatively recent
development. About two weeks ago as of this writing, I guess? I've been using
some of my leisure time to implement those ideas, and to read Mythic Second
Edition to see if I get any more.

Turns out I don't quite need Mythic yet, there's a cool thing I want to do. But
let's get the Mythic part over with anyway.

# Mythic Bookkeeping

We can consider the whole Aria Park protest and riot to be our first
scene. Chaos Factor started at 5, as standard, but there was pretty much no way
it wasn't going up to 6 here, no matter how the scene played out. So it's 6 at
the start of this scene.

Our current list of threads is:

- The Path
- Find the Missing Elves (Arcturus)
- Find Shensen (Rosalia)
- Contacting Ms. Docur (Jania)
- Find Rexus (Urist)
- Get Organized (Jade)

The Path is our "main story quest" as written in the books and modified by me
when I'm wearing the GM hat. The others are each PC's individual goals. Some can
be solved in a fairly short time, others are more medium-or-long term unless we
run into some amazing twists.

Our list of characters is:

- The Dottari
- The Chelish Citizens Group
- The Red Jills
- The Asmodeans

There are a lot more people who might appear in the adventure but these are the
groups who are in the original random encounter tables. They'll do for now.

# Scene 02: Fights in Tight Spaces

The original adventure transitioned PCs directly from the riot to another combat
scene where they fought some CCG thugs and rescued Rexus. I'm going do something
a little different. Let's say I decided to alter the scene on my own, in Mythic
terms.

Our group didn't stick together as they escaped - they got out at different
times and split up in the generalized chaos! The riot is dispersed but there's
still some confusion in the surrounding area. Bystanders who weren't near the
park find themselves having to flee alongside those who were, as opportunists
roam around looking for people to rob and fascists roam around looking for
people to arrest. Our heroes have to fight a bit more before they're
100% clear.

I've prepared three different maps, all of them fairly "tight", with a total
size of 8 x 8 spaces and several obstructions that render them even more
restricted. I'll split our heroes into three distinct groups (2/2/1) and put
them into each map alongside a randomly rolled encounter group that should
contain between 1.5x-2x the number of "actions" available to them. At this stage
the enemies are likely to be fairly weak but their numeric advantage will pose a
challenge.

Whoever ends up alone will also find Rexus in the map.

## Our Groups

My expectation would be that Jade and Rosalia are together because Jade followed
Rosalia out. Jania and Arcturus are together by pure chance, and then Urist is
alone and finds Rexus. That's his goal, and he would have seen him from far away
in the riot. Mythic, is that how things shake out[^1]? I get an Exceptional Yes,
which in this case isn't any different from a normal Yes.

- Group 1: Jade & Rosalia.
- Group 2: Arcturus & Jania
- Group 3: Urist (and Rexus!)

## Our Maps

Group 3 is getting the Alley map, because it makes sense that Rexus would be
cornered there. Group 1 gets (roll roll) the Crossing map, and Group 3 the
Tavern map.

## Our Opposition

Urist is getting 5 CCG thugs as opposition. They're pretty weak individually but
so is Rexus and there's a lot of them. That's per The Path, and it's fixed. I'm
rolling to see which of the remaining entries on the Characters list faces each
of the other groups.

(roll roll)

Group 2 is getting dottari. Three should do it.

Group 1 is getting Asmodeans. The entry for them in the Adventure One random
encounter table has a group composed of a cultist (Cleric 3), and a Redactor
(Monk 1). I'll use a spellcaster inspired by the Iron Circle Dark Adept from
Threats ot the Nentir Vale, and use a couple of Tar Devils from the same place
instead of the monk. Can't make it too easy for one of our best fighters.

## Group 1: Jade & Rosalia, Crossing, vs. Asmodeans

The PCs still have their weapons in hand, having just left the scene of the
riot. The enemies are all ready too, since they were hunting "heretics" in this
area.

Rosalia goes first and uses her Song of Humiliation to stun the Dark Adept,
saving the day right there by preventing him from casting his Dartk Tendrils
spell. Jade engages the Tar Devil closest to her and wounds his leg, though not
quite enough to cripple it.

The adept soon recovers and begins fencing with Rosalia, and the other tar devil
decides to go deal with the bigger threat and converges on Jade. The bard
manages to poke the adept for a bit of damage, and he decides to step back and
finally cast his big spell on her. Rosalia is grappled by shadow tendrils that
erupt from the ground!

Fortunately, the adept's careless movement puts him close to Jade, who has just
finished dispatching the first tar devil and is within stepping distance of the
adept's back. She stabs him, and that's that. Adept down, Rosalia released.

The two PCs have little trouble dispatching the remaining devil after that, with
Rosalia stunning him and Jade finishing the job with a decapitating slash. Now
stained by tarry ichor, the two continue their escape.

### Analysis

The fight took 4 rounds overall and the "tight spaces" effect was keenly
felt.


**Player Hat**: The PCs were positioned such that an enemy facing one of them
risked exposing their back to the other, which was pretty good! However, Rosalia
could have made better use of her Song of Humiliation, instead of trying to stab
the adept while Jade dealt with the tar devils alone. Still, stunning the dark
adept for that first turn deactivated a major threat early on, as neither PC had
great defenses against his Dark Tendrils spell.

**GM Hat**: It was pretty hard dealing with the PC's positioning. The Dark Adept
should probably have kept trying to cast Dark Tendrils after he recovered from
the initial stun. I was a bit too lenient here. The Tar Devils were also not a
huge threat without their net attack from TNV, but I think this was okay because
this is not supposed to be a deadly fight for the PCs. I'll add that in the
future.

## Group 2: Arcturus & Jania, Tavern, vs. Dottari

Arcturus does not have his knife in hand, but Jania has her cane. The dottari
begin armed. This map is considerably more open than the Crossing, and this time
it's the dottari who have the advantage of positioning.

Arcturus starts the proceedings by performing a Heroic Charge on the single
dottari to the left. He grabs him good. The other two close in on Jania, who
tries but fails to feint one of them.

Arcturus is pretty deadly against a single opponent he can grab, but that leaves
him vulnerable to other enemies. Fortunately he manages to slam the grappled
dottari to the ground and deal enough damage to take him out, allowing him to
turn to the others and get ready to defend himself. I played this as a Rapid
Strike with another Wrestling grab to increase control points, and then spending
all of those points on a single attack I resolves as a punch. That was 5d6
crushing!

Jania finds her cane does little to the guards through their armor, and Arcturus
has some trouble grabbing the next one. He critically fails while defending
against one of them, which lets him get bonked for 6 injury and makes him lose
his balance until his next turn. Jania also gets bonked, and even a minimal
damage roll takes half her HP away.

The tide turns on the next round, however, as Arcturus critically _succeeds_ on
a defense and causes the attacking guard to drop his mace! He then proceeds to
grab him and carry him away from his buddy, finishing him off in the next couple
of turns with a control-enhanced stab while Jania keeps the last guard busy.

Then Arcturus grabs the last guard and it's time for Jania to have her revenge,
as she steps behind the restrained dottario and uses her cane for a "backstab"
(a Telegraphic and Determined All-Out-Attack to the skull with a Mighty Blows FP
expenditure for extra damage). That causes a whopping 32 injury to the guard,
more than enough to finish him off.

### Analysis

This time the PCs had the positioning disadvantage. They took out the left flank
of the pincer early, but the two remaining dottari were still effective at
achieving superior positions here. Luckily for Arcturus, a character is only
defenseless against attackers who _start_ their turns on the character's back
hex. As it was, he had to defend against several "flanking" attacks from
dottari, but luckily he managed them all. He also shows how luck is still a
factor even for a PC that has combat skills as high as he does.

Altogether whis was a much more harrowing fight for our heroes even though
dottari are less dangerous than tar devils.

## Group 3: Urist & Rexus, Alley, vs. CCG Thugs

This one starts with Rexus cornered in the alley's dead end, Urist at the mouth
of the alley to the west, and 5 CCG thugs between them. I don't have a character
sheet for Rexus, as I don't intend to make him a player character. He's got a
cane, Smallsword-14, damage 1d crushing, HP 10, and a couple hundred points in
scholarly skills not useful for combat.

The thugs are still minions, and go down to any blow that deals at least 1
injury. Rexus can hold his own against them for a few turns if he focuses on
defense, but Urist has no crowd control spells. He decides to spend a second
casting Armor 3 on himself before charging into melee. This would save his life.

Two of the thugs keep focusing on Rexus, while the other three run to engage the
new threat. Despite the enemy's relative weakness, this turns out to be the
longest fight of the three! The thugs roll terribly to hit with only skill-10,
but they roll really well for their active defenses throughout most of the
fight. So Urist has some real trouble hitting them with his axe swings or shield
bashes.

At some point I switch to attacking with Rexus, but the again the minions
suddenly turn into geniuses when it's time to make a defense roll. Rexus'
defenses, on the other hand, are now unboosted, which means he gets hit a few
times. Thankfully, the damage rolls are low and he loses only 4HP total.

Urist also fails some defense rolls, but his Armor spell means he only suffers a
couple of points of injury even with the enemies rolling super well. Then he
rolls a critical failure and drops his shield! Convinced he has enough armor to
withstand the assault, the dwarf moves to making double AoAs with his axe, but
even so it takes around three more turns until he finally manages to hit all the
enemies surrounding him and finish the fight. By the time he does, Rexus has
finished his side of it as well, aided by some timely critical failures on the
part of the thugs.


### Analysis

I had an inkling this would be a challenging fight but even so it ended up being
a lot more eventful than I expected. It taught me that buffing spells matter,
and that even minions can be a bother when they stick around long enough (thanks
to a streak of good defense rolls). That left us with a 2.5:1 ration of enemy to
PC actions for most of the fight. Individually Urist was quite a bit better than
a thug, but if it wasn't for the Armor spell he'd have been worn down by their
numbers.

# More Mythic Bokkeeping

Despite a few surprising rolls, the group did well in these fights, so Chaos
Factor goes back down to 5.

We can consider Urist's "Find Rexus" goal complete, of course. The original
adventure gives XP for saving him, so the whole group gets 1 point. We can
replace it with a "Reunite" thread - it's not necessarily a goal of the
_characters_, but it's a goal of mine.

Our list of characters remains more or less the same. It's just enemies for now,
as anyone who could be an ally is laying low at the moment.

## Chaos Factor: 5

## Threads

- The Path
- Find the Missing Elves (Arcturus)
- Find Shensen (Rosalia)
- Contacting Ms. Docur (Jania)
- Reunite!
- Get Organized (Jade)

## Character

- The Dottari
- The Chelish Citizens Group
- The Red Jills
- The Asmodeans




[^1]: Odds are 50/50 at Chaos 6, so actual chances are 13/65/94. I roll a 10.
