# Intro

Our last scene saw the PCs complete the Livery delve and make for the Long Roads
Coffee House as previously arranged with Rexus. Now we'll find out what happens
there.

# GM Hat: Mythic Bookkeeping

PCs were largely in control of the previous scene and dominated the fight
against Blosodriette, so we can reduce the Chaos Factor back down to 5.

There were no changes to our lists of threads and characters. The Livery delve
advanced The Path, but did not eliminate it. All new characters were monsters or
foes, and were killed on the same scenes where they were introduced.

**Threads**

- The Path ***
- Find the Missing Elves (Arcturus)
- Find Shensen (Rosalia)
- Contacting Ms. Docur (Jania)
- Get Organized (Jade)

**Characters**

- The Dottari
- The Chelish Citizens Group
- The Red Jills
- The Asmodeans
- The Three-Legged Devil (location)
- The Livery Grimples

I roll a d10 here and get a 2. That's an Interrupt Scene, which means something
happens on the way to the coffee house. I have a pretty good idea of what it
could be, but let's consult the Meaning Table for Actions in Mythic v2 just to
for kicks. Result: "Punish Freedom". Yeah, there's plenty of that going around
these days.

My first instinct is to use the Unsanctioned Excruciation encounter, but we're
still on day one of the adventure here, so that might be too early. Let's do
something a bit different from another combat.


# Interrupt Scene: Dottari Bullies

From the Livery site it's a straight shot north to Bleakbridge, and once they
cross that they can head West until they're at the Coffee House. Let's say
there's a dottari patrol, four of them, near the bridge crossing. They're
ostensibly looking for people who took part on the riot, but what they're really
looking for is excuses to harass passers-by. They don't recognize our party has
rioters, but since they're carrying boxes and look a bit frazzled from all that
delving, they will be stopped and briefly questioned. So this is a social
encounter.

These guards are Intolerant and react at -3 to anyone who isn't
obviously a devil-worshipping fascist. It seems Kintargo doesn't actually have a
lot of laws preventing citizens from carrying weapons, but I'm still gonna rule
the party is well-armed enough that these particular guards react at a further
-2 to them. Gotta give our socialites a workout.

I'll make a reaction roll for their initial impression upon seeing the PCs in
the distance, and another one once interaction begins. Jade's Impressive looks
help offset the negative modifiers for the first roll, but no other modifier
does as those require more interaction. The final result here is a 7, a Poor
reaction.

So there our heroes are, walking along the street and trying not to stand
out. There are some other people about but not too many. Arthur is carrying two
boxes, Urist is carrying one. The guards have just finished harassins some other
pedestrian for a bribe. They spot our heroes and decide to harass them next.

They're very cocky, thiking that these strangers look like troublemakers and
that they're either going to be a nice bust or they'll pay handsomely to go on
their way. Y'know, "Look what we have here!" "Where do you think you're going
with that box?" and so on.

Before anyone else can mount a reaction, Rosalia walks up to them and begins
talking. And talking. And talking. She doesn't quite know where she's going when
she starts, but it turns into a complicated yarn about a delivery to a boss who
will be very mad if they're late because he wants to sell this stuff to an
Asmodean big shot and you know how they get when they don't get what they want
and...

This is obviously Fast-Talk, and since it's an Influence roll it will take the
place of that second reaction roll I mentioned earlier. Combining Rosalia's
usual bonuses to the reaction penalty mentioned above, that means she rolls at
-1. The dottari have a Will of 10, as per their stat block. She wins by 4, which
means the slightly stunned guards motion then past. Rosalia keeps talking for a
while until Jania tells her the guards can no longer hear them.

Though we technically ended a scene I don't feel like doing any explicit
bookkeeping for it. Nothing changed.


# Actual Scene: The Long Roads Coffee House

The rest of the walk goes without incident. They arrive at the coffee house to
find Rexus talking to its proprietor, a plump halfling lady. When they notice
the PCs have arrived, the halfing goes to greet them as old friends and invites
everyone to her office in the back so they can "catch up on old times". Most of
the party understands immediately that this is an excuse to go somehwere
private, and Arthur goes along because he sees the lady prepping a huge tray of
pastries to take with her.

Once in the office, Rexus introduces her as Laria Longroad, the owner of the
coffee house and also one of the most well-connected Bellflower Network
operatives in Kintargo. Laria and Urist alread knew each other and share a nod
of recognition. Jade and Arthur can see that the "plump cook" exterior hides the
kind of muscle that only comes from a life of hard fighting. Jania can see this
is a canny person with a lot of experience on the shady side of the street...

Laria is generally happy that the PCs came along and saved Rexus. Her past
interactions with him and Urist predispose her to trusting the party, and every
PCs sees a reason to befriend her now, so I imagine that part goes well. They
discuss their reasons for wanting to restart the Silver Ravens, and Rosalia
regales Laria with the dale of their daring delve under the Livery.

The halfling tells them about the general state of the city's resistance
elements. Lord Mayor Jilia Bailinus is missing. Laria doesn't believe she would
flee the city as the Thrune rumor mill says, so she fears for Jilia's
safety. Every other resistance-oriented group in the city seems to have gone
silent since the Night of Ashes, either lying low or destroyed.

Her own Bellflower Network decided to pull out of town for the time being, as
the risk of their secret routes being discovered was considered too great. Laria
chose to stay to keep an eye on things and to help them return in time.

She knows the Sacred Order of Archivists was destroyed, a fact of which Urist is
only too aware. Of the other "illegal" religions in town, she guesses the cult
of Sarenrae took a major blow when Shensen was disappeared and her house burned
down (Rosalia makes a pained face at that). Of the cult of Milani, goddess of
righteous rebellion, there is no sign. They operated under the name "Rose of
Kintargo", but have gone completely silent.

So yeah, things are pretty bad. It will be up to the Ravens to round up the
survivors here, as any who are still intact are too afraid to take the
initiative. Laria is more than willing to help them with that, and she'll start
by letting the PCs stay in the bunkroom on the second floor of the building, and
allowing them to use the secret basement as a base. It was normally used for
Bellflower ops as a temporary place to store refugees and "harmless contraband"
before they were shipped out of town. There is just one issue she'd like the PCs
to look into before they can use the place though... though it's best if the
current occupants explain it.

Laria takes the PCs downstairs after they've left their stuff in the bunkroom,
and calls out to the current occupants she mentioned: a group of three tengu
women, who come out warily. Jade steps forward to greet them.

    Reaction roll time! 3d6+6 gives us a 14, which is Good.

Jade is soon able to dispel their initial mistrust, and after brief
introductions she knows the trio are sisters, traveling away from Riddleport for
reasons that aren't relevant right now. The eldest, who speaks for the group, is
named Korva. They were being ferried by one Nan Comerivos, another Bellflower
Network agent. He went out to find a buyer for the small shipment of Varisian
cloth he was also smuggling, hoping to use the money to leave town with the
sisters. This was a few days ago.

The sisters want to look for him, and so does Laria, as he's a friend. However,
the PCs are in a much better position to do it. They know the city a lot better
than Korva, and they can move about without drawing suspicion a lot better than
Laria.  The sooner Comerivos is back and safe, the sooner they can stop sharing
the space with the tengu refugees...

Before any more "practical" reasons can be stated for them to take this job,
Arthur effusively agrees. But of course we'll look for your friend! It's the
heroic thing to do! The others either feel the same or agree those more
practical reasons are worth it (Jania).

Before they can do anything about the underground, though, the party really
feels they should go up to the bunkroom and finally distribute the loot! It's
getting dark, so the party decides begin their search in the morning when
everyone involved is hopefully well-rested.

## Loot Loot Loot

First off, we have the stuff that's worth money. I kinda want to move along
quicky so let's say Rosalia and Jania can accurately evaluate its value over the
time they spend sorting it.

- A platinum signet ring worth $2500, found a the livery's ground level.

- A gold signet ring worth $1500, from Blosodriette.

- An embroidered silk scarf worth $400, also from the imp.

- A pouch with a dozen pearls worth $1000 each, from the boxes.


That's a lot of money even taking into account the fact that this stuff needs to
be sold for coin. They decide that Jania will try to sell the jewelry tomorrow,
and Rosalia will try to sell the pearls.

Now we have the permanent items. Laria would have the skills necessary to evalue
the weapons' mundane properties, and Rexus can help with identifying the magic
on them, if any. Full stats are in the previous file.

- A Balanced Silver Coated Dwarven Mace.

- A Balanced Pistol (from Pyramid #3/36).

- A Suit of Light Leather Armor enchanted with Fortity 1.

Rosalia gets the pistol, and makes a note to buy ammo as soon as
possible.. Urist gets the mace, which is better than the axe he's currently
using. Jade gets the armor, which I'm going to say is black with raven
motifs. She's our least-armored front-liner, so she needs it.

Finally, the scrolls. I guess they decide to leave those stashed at the bunkroom
for now.

This ends our scene.
