# Intro

With the Fights in Tight Spaces experiment done and a success, we need to get
our party back together so we can continue our adventure. My initial impulse is
to just say they weren't all that far away from each other, so they could all
meet up shortly after the fights. Then Rexus would talk to them as written.

But let's first say if Mythic something funny to say about this. I roll 1d10 and
get a 10, so that's actually what happens, since our chaos factor is 5.

# Scene 03: A New Friend in Need

After the riot started, Thrune's officials used communication magic to call a
larger force of dottari to the region around Aria Park. They're coordinating to
"contain" the protesters in the area and prevent them from escaping, so that the
guards can properly beat/arrest the whole lot. A small host of CCG thugs and
other opportunists have arrived along with them, intent on getting their
violence on. The guards let them into the cordon because they think it's funny.

Most of the group ran into these opportunists, but Arthur and Jania ran into the
actual cordon, and poked a hole in it by defeating the dottari who attacked
them. The rest of the group soon finds out there isn't anywhere else they can
go, so they all end up meeting near that point as they escape. The dottari
eventually close off the exit, but by then all of the PCs plus a good number of
protesters have managed to escape.

Urist is glad they met up again, because he recognized Jade! She's all grown up
and badass now, but her description still matches pretty closely with that of
the child who several of his order's documents said was often seen with the
Ravens when they were out in public. From her story and actions, he's sure that
she will be willing to help him.

He's had some time to talk to Rexus while on the run, so Rexus knows he's a
friend of the family. They've already agreed to go to the nearby Three-Legged
Devil to talk, so he proposes that to the group as well. His primary argument is
that it will be a nice place to wait out the tumult, and Rexus mentions he wants
to talk to them about an important matter as well.

The group agrees. Almost all of them are interested in this important
matter. Jania isn't, not particularly, but she isn't about to argue the point
when she could be having a drink on someone else's dime instead.

- Is the tavern full? It's the middle of the day but other people might have had
  the same idea to shelter there. 50/50. Result is 63: No.

The tavern is open but nearly empty at this time of day. Only a few customers
sit there. Some bits of conversation reach Rosalia's ears - people complaining
about Thrune and wondering what the racket is near the park.

The group pushes a couple of tables together away from the other customers,
orders some quick drinks, and begins to talk. This is where Rexus explains his
story and makes his impassoned plea for the party to join him in rebellion.

Jade is _immediately_ all in on this, as are Rosalia and Urist. Arthur likes the
idea, but is open about being in town to find a missing friend, and that he
might leave to pursue that goal if he finds a lead. Jania is less open, since
she figures she can't tell these people about the not-thieve's-guild right
away. She just says her circumstances are similar to Arthur's instead.

In my head this kinda starts a trend of Arthur thinking the two of them are much
more alike than they are in reality. He gets even happier when the other tree
promise to help if at all possible. What a brave band of souls this is! Fighting
for justice! "Like some kind of league!", adds Rosalia. She probably realizes
Jania is a little more selfish than the others but hey, but she won't pass an
opportunity to have a litte fun and break the fourth wall.

Rexus gives details about his history, telling them how he was contacted by
Laria Longroad a few days back and how he discovered that his mother Portia was
an Archivist. He shows them her letter, which points them to the ancient hideout
under the Fair Fortune Livery.

Urist shows his own letter - it was hidden amongst his belongings when he left
on that Archivist expedition, and it asked him to stand by Rexus and protect his
life should something happen with Portia. Not long after a dire presentment
caused him to speed his return to Kintargo.

With the party committing themselves to rebellion for the long haul, Jade
reveals herself to them as the lost Sixth Raven, and vows to see Thrune
deposed. Rosalia and Arthur have those little stars of fascination in their
eyes; Urist would too except he already knows; and Jania is a bit more
calculating but mostly in a non-treacherous way. The Sixth Raven is just about
the best asset you can have if your goal is to oppose Thrune.



## GM Hat: What next?

Okay, so my original plan here was to transplant the underground level of the
Fair Fortune Livery under the Salix Salt Works. The party would then go straight
from the riot to the Long Roads Coffee House, and from there do both the
Prisoners of Salt raid and the document recovery delve.

Mechanically, it works, but story-wise there are a couple of wrinkles here. The
Salt Works are located on the docks _outside_ the walls, which is a really bad
place for a Silver Ravens hideout. And the livery ruins are locates all the way
across Kintargo, in a place that's really inconvenient for a salt factory. Plus
I think the demons in the basement would probably manage to make themselves
known to the assholes running the factory.

So I'm gonna run the Livery now, with the same kind of changes I made in a PBP
attempt, and Prisoners of Salt later on.
