The background for the adventure here is mostly the same, though I imagine
mainland Cheliax is going to be worse than the writers envisioned at handling
the Glorious Reclamation.

Barzilai arrived ten days ago, directed the Night of Ashes, instituted martial
law, and made seven absurd proclamations so far. Several minor protests were
dispersed by dottari or CCG thugs, and this is the largest one yet.

Anyway, our heroes are all at the protest for their varied motives. Rosalia and
Thora know each other and came here together, the others are still strangers and
are here individually.

Now that she's back in town Jade will never miss a protest against Thrune if she
can help it. It's also a good way to catch up on the news.

Rosalia and Thora are here due to rumors that the Shensen would be present,
though they'd probably show up even if she hadn't gone missing.

Mario is here to find the last surviving member of his former teacher's family,
Rexus Victocora. He was tipped off by Laria Longroad that the man would be
here.

Jania is also interested on the news, though in her case she's worried about how
the current political climate might affect her school. Her disposition also
makes her inclined to try some pickpocketing here.

# Actions

Everyone is going to spend their first couple of hours on Watch the Crowd and
Listen for Rumors actions. Watching the crowd is a roll on the better of
**Perception** and **Observation**. Listening for Rumors is either **Current
Affairs** or again the best between **Perception and Observation**

Watching the Crowd:

- Jania lacks Observation, so she's rolling Perception. Success by 3.

- Thora rolls Perception as well, since it's better than her
  Observation. Success by 3.

- Mario fails his Observation roll by 2.

- Rosalia makes her Perception roll by 2.

- And Jade amazingly makes her Perception roll by 7! Not a critical success, but
  an excellent margin.

So everyone but Mario notices that the crowd is agitated and discontented, but
not overly violent. Jade additionally notices a subtle undercurrent there as if
there's a group trying to organize the crowd without being seen. There might be
trouble brewing!

They also perceive the general layout of the protest, and which groups are part
of it: Kintargo loyalists who demand local rule, democratic activists who demand
an election for mayor, "economic conservatives" who are upset at the increased
taxation, trolls who are in it for the lulz and perhaps a riot, and fascists who
are trying to shout the others down in support of Barzilai.

Mario is too upset and overwhelmed by the crowd to notice anything except that
they're noisy.

Listening for Rumors:

Everyone uses Perception except for Rosalia, who rolls Current Affairs.

- Jania uses Stealth as a complimentary skill and makes her roll by 3. She gets
  two rolls on the rumor table and hears that a) Shensen is missing, and might
  have been imprisoned and b) something is killing tieflings in the Devil's
  Nursery. Could it be the Temple Hill Slasher?

- Thora succeeds by 1. She gets a roll on the rumor table and hears speculation
  about Mayor Bailinus' fate. Some say she ran away when Thrune rolled into
  town, others say she died on an accident.

- Rosalia succeeds by 5. She gets three rolls! She hears the same rumor about
  Shensen, which is very providential since that's what she came here to
  learn. She also hears that the prisons are so full Thrune started keeping
  prisoners in warehouses, or putting them to work in commandeered buildings
  like the Salix Salt Works. Thrune also plans to bring public excruciations to
  Kintargo, a practice that's common in the Chelish heartlands but used to be
  forbidden here.

- Mario succeeds by 2. He hears that Thrune's bodyguard Nox might be a
  half-devil or something of the sort.

- Jade fails by 1. She learns the basic situation of the city, which is useful
  to her, but fails to turn up any juicy bits of gossip.

Three of the PCs will perform a third action, and after that I'm moving on to
the riot.

Jania will pick some pockets! Let's use the default rules from DF Exploits for
it. She makes her **Pickpocketing** roll by 3 and thus earns 3 silvers... which
is actually a mistake on my part (3 silvers is $60, she earned $15). But I'm
letting that stand.

This is where it might get fun. Jade will attempt to Rable-Rouse, and organize
the crowd so that they can protest with one voice. Rosalia on the other hand
will silence the lulzers and fascists.

The original book says rallying the crowd is a Diplomacy or Perform check, and
silencing the assholes is a Bluff or Intimidate check. What about GURPS?

Both of these actions involve addressing large groups of people so **Public
Speaking** should figure into it somehow, if only as a complementary skill to
help grab the crowd's attention. Jade is trying to organize a group of NPCs,
which is definitely covered by **Leadership**. Rosalia is going to try to
browbeat the fascists first, using **Intimidation**

Jade succeeds in her Leadership roll with a margin of 10, which I think it's
enough to get a nice unified chant going and for the crowd to recognize and part
for her when shit goes down.

Rosalia makes her roll by 3, which is enough for a regular success too. The
"Chelish loyalists" (fascist scum) are silenced.

Then what happens is that the two ladies notice each other's efforts! The final
action before the riot start will be each of them attempting to help the
other. So how about we do one more rallying action with Rosalia helping Jade and
one more suppression with Jade helping Rosalia?

So Rosalia rolls **Singing** to help a second **Leadership** roll from Jade, and
Jade rolls **Leadership** to help a second **Intimidation** roll from Rosalia,
directing the crowd to help shouting the trolls down. Regular successes all
around, which are enough.

Each time the characters gain a quest XP reward in the original, I'm giving
them 1 character point each. Here, they all gain the maximum of 4, for 4
successful actions.

# The Riot

Things happen more or less as described in the book at this point. Barzilai
appears, makes his eight proclamation forbidding foreign ship captains from
leaving their vessels on pain of torture, and gets pelted with horse manure.

I wanted Mario to be the one who throws it, since he's pretty enraged at
Barzilai right now. This was actually the first roll I made in Foundry, an
attack using **Throwing Art**. I took into account the distance between Mario's
position in the map and the balcony (behind and above Nox), as well as its
elevation. And he hit!

The horse apple veers off-course at the last minute because of course Barzilai
has a **Missile Shield** on himself, but he still flinches and spills his wine,
ordering Nox and the dottari to move against the crowd. The fight is on!
