---
layout: post
title: "Let's Play Hell's Rebels: Player Character Origins"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - character
    - lets-play
    - hells-rebels
---

Hell's Rebels includes some traits in its Player's Guide that can be assigned to
PCs to tie them to the campaign either by providing a motivation or by giving
them additional ways to contribute. A PC could be a minor worker in the opera,
or a fed-up citizen, or interested in the city's history, and so on.

I don't think those quite fit what I have in mind for my solo campaign. They are
suitable as backgrounds for level 1 starting characters and their mechanics can
be useful, but pretty much cease to be a factor in the story once the "main
plot" kicks in.

Despite being released six years earlier than Hell's Rebels, Neverwinter does a
much better job at allowing players to create characters who are _deeply_
involved with the campaign at hand. More than starting motivations, its
character themes provide entire story arcs that will remain relevant throughout
the entire campaign.

I want the same thing for my game, so I'm going to replace the relatively
generic reasons given in the Hell's Rebels player guide with something that's
narratively on par with Neverwinter's themes. I want them to not only be more
exciting, but also to reflect the increased starting power of Dungeon Fantasy
characters. They're going to be key players in the rebellion from minute one of
the campaign. Why just be a random history buff when you can be The Last
Archivist instead? This status might be reflected in some of their traits, but
the story consequences are the main thing here.

Here are the "character themes" I intend to use. There are five, one for each of
my intended PCs, but presenting them separately will help provide some
inspiration to other GMs who want to do the same thing whether in GURPS or
another system. I'm using Dungeon Fantasy archetype and ancestry names instead
of those from Pathfinder, but the correlations should be pretty easy to
deduce. Each of them also has plot ties to some of the game's possible allied
factions.

Each theme bellow includes a short background description, and paragraphs
listing prerequisites, benefits, and drawbacks. These are mostly story-related,
but they might also add optional traits to your character's template. You can
buy them right away with your starting points, or buy them later with earned
points like any other template trait.

## The Sixth Raven

Most surviving historical documents about the Silver Ravens say they were five
in number: Jackdaw the elf swashbuckler, Amyreid the half-elf cleric, Ba the
halfling wizard, Kyda the human bard, and Brakisi the human scout.

These documents were wrong. There was one other: you.

You were a small orphan child then, adopted by the group as a kind of mascot
somewhere along their career. You shared their love for Kintargo and its
freedom, but you were too young to go on any actual adventures, so you mostly
helped around the hideout and running small errands, and heard from their big
battles when they returned to tell the tale.

This lasted until the last battle, the one against the massed armies of House
Thrune. Jackdaw sent you away with many of her other non-combatant friends the
day before that one, promising she'd call you back when the danger was past. She
never did, because the Ravens lost. Jackdaw surrendered so that the demonic army
would spare the city, and the others were either killed by Thrune agents over in
subsequent years or disappeared forever.

Over the following decades you would finally reach adulthood and set out on your
own, becoming an adventurer of some skill and renown elsewhere in the Inner Sea
region. Now, you're ready to return home and finish the work of your
old friends. Your name has been struck from the history books, but your passion
burns as brightly as it ever did.

**Prerequisites**: You must belong to a species long-lived enough that you could
have been a child 70 years ago and still be of adventuring age in the
present. Being a dwarf or some kind of elf is enough, but the Half-Spirit
ancestries from DF 3 might also fit. Another alternative is to play a
[Warforged][1] who was an _active_ member of the Ravens and spent some of the
intervening decades disabled and unconscious, but was recently repaired. You can
belong to any profession.

**Benefits**: You remember things. The GM might occasionally give you hints and
clues about old Silver Raven safehouses and stashes. You also knew the Ravens
personally and they knew you - should any of them still be around, you will be
able to recognize each other.

You can add the Serendipity {15} trait to your template if it's not already
present. This represents your memories of old Kintargo and Raven hangouts, and
might let you find useful shortcuts, items, and passages that are not
pre-written into the campaign.

**Drawbacks**: Things remember you. Demons, vampires, and other similarly
long-lived monsters who faced the original Ravens back in the day will recognize
you just as readily, and will be extra-mean to you as a result. Once word
spreads that you're back, some of them might even travel to Kintargo for the
sole purpose of killing you.

This can be represented by the Enemy (Monster of the Week, 9 or less) {-15}
trait, which gets added as an optional disadvantage to your template.

If you only have the DFRPG, the disadvantage works like this: the GM rolls 3d6
in secret at the beginning of each adventure or each session of an extended
adventure. If the result is a 9 or less, a significantly powerful monster will
appear somewhere along the coming adventure or session, inserting itself into
one of the upcoming situations and making things more complicated and dangerous
for you and your group. It's usually something complicated to fight, and not
necessarily the same monster every time. This is _in addition_ to any
pre-existing monsters in the adventure who recognize you and want you dead.

## The Last Archivist

You were a member of the Sacred Order of Archivists, a secret society made up of
worshipers of various deities of knowledge and wisdom. The Order was dedicated
to preserving the true history of Kintargo and other such "forbidden" knowledge
from Thrune redactors.

The Order is no more: its hideout was raided and ransacked by Thrune forces
during the Night of Ashes. You were away when it happened, on a mission to
retrieve an important document in another city. That's why you survived. When
you returned, you reached out to a few contacts and learned that some of your
colleagues have surviving family. They were nobles and their family estate was
razed during the Night of Ashes, but one of their sons is still at large. You
are now trying to find this son, help him stay safe, and then get revenge on
House Thrune.

**Prerequisites**: None! While the Order is an excellent origin for Clerics,
Wizards, and other big brains, it could easily have employed fightier or
sneakier types as security or retrieval specialists.

**Benefits**: It's impossible to be a member of the Archivists and not learn
_something_. In addition to being familiar with the Order's hideout and its
procedures, you also know a bit of the region's unredacted history and a few
other tidbits of unrelated but potentially useful knowledge. You can recognize
the Sixth Raven if run into them.

You can add the History and Research skills as an option to your template, and
also all specialties of Hidden Lore if they aren't there already. You also add
Wild Talent {20} as an optional advantage, representing a large trove of random
knowledge. If you're using the Basic Set, add Intelligence Analysis to your
template as well.

**Drawbacks**: You're riven by grief and driven by revenge against Barzilai
Thrune and his minions. This might manifest as Intolerance (Diabolists) {-5}, an
Obsession (depose Thrune)(12) {-10}, or both! The Obsession might seem redundant
since it's also the overall campaign goal, but it also compels you to take
potentially risky and unwise courses of action if they seem like they will yield
quicker results. It could also prevent you from retreating from a fight against
Thrune's minions.

## Knight of the Deep

You come from one of the subaquatic communities off the coast of Ravounel, where
you enjoy an heroic reputation. You recently went to visit your friend Aava in
the coastal village of Acisazi, only to find her missing and the village
suffering under a strange malaise. The village's elder told you Aava had led a
small party of scouts into Kintargo to ask seek help breaking the curse, but she
never reported back. She begged you to find Aava, and you accepted.

You arrive at this land-lubber town to find it embroiled in a lot more trouble
than you thought possible. Aava is nowhere to be found and neither is her
contact, the singer Shensen. You suspect both of them vanished into the prisons
of the despotic Barzilai Thrune, and your queries have led you to the Aria Park
protest. You suspect you might need to bloody this human despot's nose to
fulfill your mission, and that's just fine with you.

**Prerequisites**: You must belong to a species capable of breathing underwater!
Dungeon Fantasy 3: The Next Level contains two possible choices here: the Sea
Elf and the Water-Infused. From this blog, you might also pick the [Argonian][2]
or perhaps a Warforged who has been modified to be hydrodynamic and Amphibious.

This theme is open to any profession, but martial types should probably keep in
mind the rules for [underwater combat for fish-people][3].

**Benefits**: The people of Acisazi know and trust you, and Aava is your good
friend (or even a relative if you're also a sea elf).

You can add Swimming, Aquabatics and Survival (Undersea) to your template as
optional skills, and should probably put some points in them during character
creation.

**Drawbacks**: Add Obsession (find Aava and her scouts) (12) {-5} to your
template as an optional disadvantage. It's what you already want to do anyway,
but like the Last Archivist's Obsession it might drive you to unwise actions.

## Phantom Thief

You are one of Lady Docur's School for Girls' most distinguished graduates. You
had parted ways with your alma mater and set up shop in nearby Vyre, but a
recent letter from Lady Docur herself brought you back to Kintargo. The city's
political climate is getting rather inhospitable to the school, and she hopes
you will be able to help them survive these turbulent times.

In other words: the school is currently the closest thing Kintargo has to a
thieves' guild. They specialize in training secret couriers and the nicer sort
of thief. Thrune prefers the _nasty_ sort of thief, so things might get
difficult for the school and its students. That's where you come in.

Of course, you're not here just to help your old school. You're also, er, taking
a breather from some rather complex entanglements you left behind in the good
city of Vyre. Hopefully it will be a long while before you have to set foot
there again.

**Prerequisites**: It's a school for girls, which means you either are a woman
or only discovered you _weren't_ after graduation. You must also be some manner
of Thief, either the base template or one of the variants from the corresponding
Dungeon Fantasy Denizens book.

**Benefits**: You know Lady Docur and other characters associated with your alma
mater, and have their trust. You also know Vyre's customs, which might come in
handy if you ever need to go back there.

Add Area Knowledge and Current Affairs for both Kintargo and Vyre to your
template, as well as Connoisseur, Savoir-Faire and the Fashion Sense
advantage. The School does give one a proper high society education.

**Drawbacks**: Those Vyre entanglements will come back to haunt you if you ever
return there during the campaign.

No extra disadvantages here: everything which could make a thief's life harder
is already part of the relevant templates.

## Mysterious Satirist

Even before Barzilai Thrune rolled in like he owned the place, you were already
well-known among Kintargo's rebels, malcontents, and antifascists. Whether you
make poems, plays, essays, or songs, your work criticizing House Thrune was on
everybody's minds and the pseudonym you chose for yourself was spoken in the
same tones as that of The Poison Pen and other such figures. Thrune's opponents
speak it with admiration; his supporters, with disgust. That's how you like it.

While no one has figured who you are yet, Barzilai's arrival and the Night of
Ashes have made your life very difficult already. Most of your contacts among
Kintargo's several resistance organizations have vanished, left town, or gone to
ground. While you still value your art, you also feel it's time to engage in
more direct action against this dictator.

**Prerequisites**: None! While Bards obviously have a head start in terms of the
artistic skills implied by this theme, the Mysterious Satirist could be anyone.

**Benefits**: Choose one of the Bellflower Network, the Cult of Sarenrae, the
Rose of Kintargo, or the Poison Pen. You're indirectly acquainted with that
group or individual. Though you have never met, you have corresponded and set up
pre-arranged signs that will let you recognize each other when the meeting does
happen.

Add the artistic or performance skills of your choice to your template, as well
as an appropriate Talent covering them to your optional advantages. Writing,
Poetry, and Musical Composition are appropriate if you share your work through
in written form. Public Speaking, Singing, Acting and Musical Instrument are
also good if you actually perform it. If you have the GURPS Basic Set, you can
also add Artist to the list of possible artistic skills, and you also add
Propaganda no matter what your medium is.

**Drawbacks**: Add a 10-point Secret (Mysterious Satirist), Selfless, and
Trickster to your optional disadvantage list if they are not already there. The
first represents the risk of bad things happening when the authorities discover
who you are, above and beyond what being a Silver Raven would bring. The other
two represent possible reasons for you to have chosen this path in the first
place.


[1]: {{ "/2023/02/07/warforged-variants.html" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2018/10/10/elder-scrolls-others.html" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2023/07/11/underwater-dungeon-fantasy.html" | relative_url }}
