---
layout: post
title: "Streamlined Melee Mastery for GURPS"
tags:
    - gurps
---

In GURPS, the Trained by a Master advantage allows a character to perform
martial feats on par with those seen in kung fu movies and other similar
stories. The Weapon Master advantage does basically the same in a slightly
different way. They overlap so much that I'm not sure if they were meant to
exist in the same campaign!

I think both advantages are fairly priced on their own, but I don't think both
of them combined are worth 75 points. Choosing to only allow one of them in your
campaign is a fairly simple matter, but what if you want to allow both,
potentially on the same character?

Most of the differences between the two traits are fiddly matters of skill
coverage. Sweeping those aside leaves us with the remaining elephant in the
room, the Weapon Master damage bonus.

## Elephant Examination: The Damage Bonus

In my experience, the damage bonus is the biggest game changer in the entire WM
package. Even if a Weapon Master never learns a supernatural skill and never
attacks or parries more than once per turn, they're still going to feel like an
entirely different character from someone who has the exact same stats but lacks
the advantage. It feels a bit unfair to me that this bonus is not available to
characters that focus on unarmed strikes.

GURPS uses realistic assumptions as a base for its rules, and under those
assumptions a combatant with a weapon always has a big advantage over one
without. The unarmed fighter risks limb injury on every parry and strike. The
armed one has greater reach and much better damage from using swing attacks or
simply from doing a better damage type than crushing.

An unarmed fighter with Trained By a Master can approach that by taking other
traits... But then they've spent 60 points and bought a Hard combat skill to be
on par with someone who bought an Average skill and took Weapon Master (single
weapon) for 20 points.

I don't feel a need to keep this "effectiveness gap" between armed and unarmed
skills when we're dealing with a campaign that allows "mastery" advantages in
the first place.

## New Traits
rainbow
My solution to the above situation is to rejigger the existing traits. The new
and altered traits below are available in any campaign that also allows both
Trained by a Master and Weapon Master.

### True Master (50 points)

Through either decades of dedication or being some sort of war god, you have
mastered all forms of "archaic" combat. You gain _all_ the benefits from having
both Trained by a Master and the full version of Weapon Master. Your unarmed
strikes enjoy the same damage bonus described under Weapon Master. This bonus
_does_ stack with other bonuses from high striking skills and from traits like
Claws.

Those two advantages still exist, and represent a slightly less comprehensive
form of mastery. You can upgrade from any of them to True Master by spending the
difference between their point value and 50.

### Iron Limbs (10 points)

Your limbs are immune to incidental injury during unarmed combat. Enemies can't
damage your limbs when they parry your unarmed attacks with a weapon, nor can
they switch targets and damage your limbs when you fail to parry their
attacks. You also don't hurt yourself when hitting armored opponents with
unarmed strikes. Your limbs can still be deliberately targeted by enemy attacks,
however.

This trait replaces Unarmed Master, as it is basically Unarmed Master without
the damage bonus.

## Conclusion

I like those two traits, though as of this writing I still need to actually
field-test them.

In campaigns that use these two new advantages, an unarmed specialist _can't_
turn their limbs into Strikers. That's what Unarmed Master did, and we did away
with it. IF the specialist in question happens to belong to a non-human species
that has natural Strikers, though, _those_ would stack with True Master. Beware
of boxing crab-people!

Iron Limbs doesn't have any prerequisites: you could buy it without having any
of the "mastery" advantages. This allows it to be used to represent an extremely
focused blessing, or a creature whose limbs are naturally hard to hurt or even
naturally made of metal.

Finally, if you feel 10 points for Iron Limbs is too expensive for someone who
is already a True Master, you could try rolling it into True Master at no extra
cost, and eliminating the separate Iron Limbs advantage.


[^1]: There are cheaper versions which apply the same benefits to a smaller set
    of weapons, but for the moment we're looking at the full package.

[^2]: Though you could argue getting that damage bonus and increased rate of
    fire on a bow is more beneficial than being able to punch faster.
