---
layout: post
title: "Are Mecha Silly?"
tags:
    - opinion
    - gurps
    - lancer
---

Recently I saw someone start a thread on the RPG.net forum, with the title "Why
are mecha silly?". The person in question was of the opinion that not only were
mecha not silly, they were _plausible_, and went on to list reasons they thought
so.

Of course, all of those were swiftly debunked by posters, but I think the thread
kinda got away from the main point after a while. So I thought I'd write a bit
about this subject here.

The thread's title had a bit of an unfortunate framing, because it started from
the premise that mecha _are_ silly even though its opening poster didn't think
so. A better question to ask might be "Are Mecha Silly?"

If you're reading this blog, you probably know what mecha are, but here's a
working definition. The word "mecha" started as a term used by Japanese anime
fans to refer to cool machines in general. Tanks, fighter planes, sports cars
and so on were all technically mecha under this definition. It didn't take long
for the meaning to drift a bit, though.

Nowadays pretty much everyone uses the word to describe humanoid machines,
usually big, usually piloted, usually built to fight. They're also known as
"giant robots", though that tends to annoy pedants a bit more because they're
almost never automonous. But are they silly?

Well, "mecha" might have had its meaning narrowed, but it's still about as broad
as "spaceship". I'd go as far to say the answers that apply to one also apply to
the other. And the real answer to our titular question is: it depends!

Both mecha and spaceships are almost always _impossible_ or _impractical_ to
build in the real world, but that hardly makes them inherently silly.

Both mecha-centric and spaceship-centric science fiction have complex taxonomies
that measure the intended amounts of realism in any given story. And fiction in
general has of course a taxonomy that measures the intended level of seriousness
or silliness in a given story.

[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MR7xA2JbNCQ
