---
layout: post
title: "Mooks of the Multiverse"
tags:
    - gurps
---

Back in the early years of this blog I spent a large amount of time writing up
fantasy monsters for GURPS as part of my [Dragon's Dogma adaptation][2]. Then I
spent a long time reviewing D&D fantasy monsters by reading through most of the
significant monster books for the 4th edition of that game.

I figured it's about time I gave some love to other genres. There's more to life
than dungeon fantasy, after all. There's also Action!

GURPS Action's "bestiary" consists of a single entry: Man With Gun. All stats at
10, an appropriate gun skill between 10 and 15, plus a gun and maybe some armor
drawn from the book's short equipment list. For the nameless opponents that show
up in most campaigns, this is enough. But some settings, particularly science
fiction ones, like to get a bit more specific than that.

Mooks of the Multiverse is going to be a series of indeterminate size where each
post looks at the enemies from a modern or science fiction setting and tries to
stat them and (more importantly) their gear for GURPS. In this initial post,
we'll establish some ground rules.

## Action-style Mooks

The basic definition of a mook we'll be using is the one from [this post][1] I
wrote way back in 2017, which is also the one from GURPS Action. Mooks or
minions are nameless opponents who tend to show up in large numbers to fight our
heroic PCs. Their numbers, more than their stats, are what make them a genuine
threat. A small band of minions will mainly serve to make the PCs look good, but
a large mob is a danger that needs to be managed. "Small" and "large" are
relative - the more mult-target attacks the PCs have, the more minions they can
handle safely.

Minions only fight using the most basic maneuvers to both attack and protect
themselves. They can make active defense rolls, but a single solid hit will take
them out of the fight. Whether that means they're dead, injured, or even running
away depends on the specific context, but they're out.

In the original article I interpret "a solid hit" to mean any hit that does at
least 1 point of injury after armor. Depending on the setting we're talking
about, we might need to be a bit more flexible than that. The following rules
will come up very often:


### Imperial Stormtrooper Marksmanship Academy

**The Rule**: Also known as "Mook Marksmanship" in Action. When this rule is in
effect, minions armed with guns (or beam weapons!) always miss with their first
attack in the fight. Subsequent attacks are rolled normally.

**Additional Notes**: The main difference here is that this isn't paired with
the Gun Control Law rule that prevents minions from shooting at gun-less PCs and
makes them easy to disarm. The sort of minion we'll look at usually has no
trouble in these areas, but their aim still sucks even when the PCs _are_ armed.


### Imperial Stormtrooper Armor Drills

**The Rule**: When this rule is in effect, mooks count as having DR 0 no matter
what kind of armor they might be wearing. Any other benefits the armor confers,
like built-in communicators or environmental protection, still apply normally.

**Additional Notes**: This new rule is mainly relevant for science fiction
settings, which often feature mooks in cool sci-fi armor. It can also be useful
in modern-day campaigns whose mooks dress in state of the art tacticool
gear. This sort of protection is pretty awesome for PCs, but can end up making
mooks too tough if getting that 1 point of damage past DR is no longer
guaranteed.

The traditional solution to this problem is to invent an extra-crappy tier of
armor that only mooks wear, but that's too much work for a dubious result. Even
"realistically bad" ultra-tech armor might still offer too much protection if
you aim to replicate something like the Battle of Endor from Return of the
Jedi. As a bonus, this rule allows PCs to wear mook armor and be well-protected,
because it will work normally for them. It also allows the GM to upgrade a mook
to a Worthy opponent on the spot and make it a bigger threat without changing
any numbers.




[1]: {{ "/gurps/2017/01/26/minions.html" | relative_url }}

[2]: {{ "/projects/dragons-dogma/" | relative_url }}
