---
layout: post
title: "On Transhuman Space 02: What it Got Wrong"
tags:
    - gurps
    - transhuman-space
    - opionion
---

Since my [previous post][1] about Transhuman Space, "It Came From the Bookshelf"
has continued to review a few more of the setting's books. We have new reviews
up for [High Frontier][2], [In the Well][3], and now [Deep Beyond][4].

Mr. Frazer's opinions on the setting continue to match my own: the tech is cool
and you can see a lot of research work went into these books, but they're
thoroughly permeated by that "end of history" thinking I discussed in my
previous post and this makes them incredibly frustrating.

The Deep Beyond review calls the setting's editorial bent "right-libertarian",
and I think that's quite accurate. While the line paints the Fifth Wave nations
of Earth in a consistently better light than their poorer cousins, it's almost
fawning[^1] when it describes the frontier communities out in space.

I mean, we already established that one of Transhuman Space's core tenets is
that technological progress is Good, and that one of the main things that can
make it Not Good is excessive government meddling. Therefore, the most advanced
and therefore Best places are those where there's no government at all, and tech
companies are allowed to do whatever the heck they want. And that's the
Duncanite stations and other far-flung habitats.

Another keen observation by Mr. Frazer is that there seems to be a sort of
low-key editorial war going on in these pages. You can see that not every one of
the line's writers agree with its official position, but that the mandate for
"neutral", "journalistic" writing gets in the way of them expressing
this. _Broken Dreams_ in particular is a whole book of this - if I remember
correctly, Jamais Cascio is very much against the sort of copyright maximalism
described in that book, but he gets edited down to distant neutrality even in
the book that's meant to be critical of some of the setting's aspects.

Mr. Frazer says a bunch of other things better than I can, so I'll finish here
by telling you to go read his reviews, and by saying it's extremely unlikely
I'll ever run Transhuman Space as written (or as most of its fans think it
should be run).

People have long complained that there isn't much guidance on "what to do" in
the THS setting. I'm guessing this stems from a strong belief in its claims of
optimism. Everything is already good, everyone is already rich and practically
immortal[^2], so what's left?

The official examples seem to point towards Fifth Wave slice-of-life, and a lot
of people seem to have settled on playing intelligence agencies for some world
power or another. These days, I can't really see using THS for anything other
than rebelling against the status quo as presented. Y'know, make it the
contemporary iteration of cyberpunk it clearly should have been all along.

[^1]: In its restrained, dry, journalistic way.
[^2]: Everyone who matters.

[2]: http://www.itcamefromthebookshelf.com/2019/11/transhuman-space-high-frontier.html
[3]: http://www.itcamefromthebookshelf.com/2019/11/transhuman-space-in-well.html
[4]: http://www.itcamefromthebookshelf.com/2019/11/transhuman-space-deep-beyond.html
