---
layout: post
title: "Overthinking Shadowrun: An Introduction"
tags:
    - shadowrun
    - gurps
    - setting
    - adaptation
---

## Two Approaches to Setting Design

In my experience, when designing a setting for a role-playing game, there are
two broad strategies you can take. Both are equally valid, and both have been
historically very successful both artistically and commercially.

The first strategy is to have a clear idea of the type of story you want to
support, to focus your research on that, and to deliberately work it into your
writing every step of the way. This tends to result in games that are very
up-front about the themes they want to focus on, and which usually include
substantial discussions on what those themes are and how they can be brought up
in play. Whether players like or dislike one of these games, they always know
what it's about. Ars Magica, Unknown Armies, Pendragon and most of the
World/Chronicles of Darkness games are excellent examples of this approach.

The second strategy is to put yourself in the mindset of an enthusiastic 11 year
old and to write a setting that's basically a list of things you find cool. This
results in games that value that cool over all other things, including
coherence, consistency, and verisimilitude. They don't go into very deep
discussions on what they're about, because they're really about having fun and
basking in the coolness, and the way to do that is so self-evident to the author
they don't feel the need to spend too long explaining it. As a result, every
group has their own ideas about a game of this sort, and they tend to argue
ferociously about it on the Internet.  D&D itself is the biggest example of the
"enthusiastic kid" approach, as are other popular games like Warhammer and
Shadowrun, the subject of our current article.

## Shadowrun?

Shadowrun is indeed one of the exemplars of the "enthusiastic 11 year old"
design strategy, and I'm going to explain why. Shadowrun is technically a
cyberpunk game, but it actually doesn't borrow all that much from cyberpunk
literature. Its early editions mostly borrow from Neuromancer, and even then
they only take the parts an enthusiastic 11 year old would find cool when
reading the book: the props and the Sense/Net heist. Why am I so sure? Because
those are the parts I thought were the coolest when I first read the book, back
when I was 11.

By "props" I mean stuff like the cyberdecks, cyberware, and fancy guns. Some of
these also come from other sources[^1], but they were all brought in solely
because the authors found them cool.

As for the Sense/Net heist, well, playing through variations of that high-tech
dungeon crawl is basically the core activity of the game. Get hired by a shady
dude in a suit to break into a heavily-guarded corporate building and steal an
expensive McGuffin. Get paid (or double-crossed), and repeat it all next
adventure.

You can build entire campaigns out of that, and it can be immensely fun! It's
just not very true to literary cyberpunk, which is why William Gibson's review
of the game as a whole is "gag me with a spoon".

But wait, what about the whole fantasy aspect of the setting? Well, while it
does serve to set the game apart from its competition, it's also pretty much
another set of props. It's not there because the original authors wanted a deep
exploration of what happens when these two worlds collide. Instead, it was
literally because the original developer saw a picture of an elf on a Harley and
said "That's cool! I want that!". You can't even make the excuse that it's
ripping off Tolkien, because it's clearly ripping off AD&D.

This is by no means a knock on the game. Through its 25+ years of existence, it
has been very successful and made a lot of people happy. However, absolutely
none of the elements you see in there exist for any other reason than the
authors thought they were cool. Any attempt to assign them deeper meaning, or to
provide plausible explanations for their existence, is ultimately doomed to fail
because of this reason[^2].

## So Why Do You Care, Chummer?

Shadowrun occupies this weirdly shaped place in my heart. I love the premise to
bits, and considered myself a fan of the game ever since I read my first
corebook[^3] as an enthusiastic 11-year-old. But even I found a few things that
annoyed me in the execution of that awesome premise. And as I grew up, the
annoyances mounted, either because I became more capable of noticing them or
because new ones got added over time as books came out and the tone of the game
drifted.

Every game experiences some thematic drift over time, but games designed in the
"cool-centric" way are particularly susceptible to it because there aren't
detailed explanations on what the tone and themes should be in the first
place. This leads to every individual who reads the book forming their own ideas
about that, including the ones who will eventually become new writers and
editors for it. And Shadowrun certainly has drifted, despite having a very
strong hook for what players do. Sure, shadowrunners do illegal things for
money, but who _are_ they? What _are_ those things? Who do they work for? And
what does it _mean_? These questions look artsy-fartsy, but they have a bigger
impact than you'd think. The answer the game gives to them has changed over
time.

## Shadowrun Over The Ages

You see, early editions had this "heroic punk" thing going on. It was never
stated outright, possibly because it was self-evident to its original authors,
but you could see it in early setting descriptions and published
adventures. They tended to assume shadowrunners were these uncouth outsiders who
opposed evil megacorps and crime syndicates. Those early adventures often had
one or both of these as the opposition, with the client usually being someone
who couldn't stand up to them for themselves[^4]. Even when the client was
itself a megacorp, the adventure usually revealed that fulfilling the job to the
letter would be a bad idea.

The fiction also conveyed this feeling. The intro fiction for the SR2 corebook
was about a woman who got marked for death by the megacorp she used to work for,
and fell in with a group of sympatethic shadowrunners. You also had the Sam
Verner trilogy, which features shadowrunner protagonists who fight evil corps
and save the world at the end.

From around the end of second edition to the end of the third, the tone became a
bit more neutral. Adventures from this period have runners working for big
organizations more often, and the focus shifts from "is this thing you're doing
good?" to "can you survive to collect your pay when the drek hits the fan at the
end?". You still have some indication that your runners aren't supposed to be
complete scum, however: Shadowland commenters frequently mention that there are
lines a proper runner won't cross, and there are some groups which PCs are
always supposed to oppose.

Then came Fourth Edition! It was, in a word, revolutionary. And by this I mean
it caused a lot of people to (figuratively) take up arms and fight each other
until the streets ran red with blood and the night sky was tinted orange with
flames. My opinion on it these days is somewhat complex and more or less
diametrically opposite to that of most of the fanbase[^5]. I loved the new
props, and disliked the new tone.

SR4 was the first edition of the game whose rules were incompatible with its
predecessors, and it also made significant changes to the classic props of the
setting. The bulky aesthetic of the 80's was replaced by something closer to the
design sensibilities of the 00's, with wireless networking being more common the
Matrix being a lot more accessible. Personally I loved these particular changes.
They made the setting feel a lot more similar to Ghost in the Shell, which is
always a good thing in my book.

There were also a lot I ended up disliking about SR4. Up until quite recently I
thought a lot of that was introduced in response to the larger fanbase's
vehement complaints that the game looked "too clean and tidy", but a closer
reading of the introductions for its corebook showed me that the seeds of that
were already there from the beginning. By then the definition of "shadowrunner"
had mutated from its original form into "shadowrunners are criminals, and
criminals do bad stuff, m'kay?".

What started as a subtle thing early in the edition got more and more emphasized
as the publisher scrambled to please the fanbase in the wake of a major
real-life financial corruption scandal that had caused most of the writers who
were fans of the "heroic punk" aesthetic to stop working for the company.

Eventually, those same evil megacorps and crime syndicates that used to always
be the opposition became your usual clients, and your usual jobs were the kind
of things you used to be hired to thwart. The new editorial direction was not to
my tastes, and the real-life chaos caused a _severe_ dip in book quality for
time. While the editorial quality slowly improved again, the books were still
sprinkled with elements that reinforced the darker tone.

Fifth Edition is said to have eased back on this a little, but it also rolled
back several decisions I liked about the look and feel of technology on
Fourth. Combined with my extreme annoyance at the tonal shift on the tail end of
Fourth Edition, I ended up dropping the game entirely.

## And Now What?

Well, it turns out I still want to play Shadowrun, or at least something
following the same premise. Aside from the tonal shift I described above,
however, there are quite a few minor annoyances with the system or with certain
setting elements that I haven't gotten into in this article, and taken together
they sort of prevent me from just taking the whole thing as it is any more.

And to be fair to the fine people who make the actual game, it's not like they
can just rewrite the thing to fit my tastes. I am clearly not in the majority,
and the majority is just fine with the way things are.

So I'm going to build my own game[^6]. I'm going to take the basic premise, and
build a setting around it in a way I hope is closer to the first strategy I
outlined at the start of this article. I want it to have a well-defined set of
themes and moods, with good guidelines on how to bring those to life during
play. I want to answer all those artsy-fartsy questions, and I want the result
to be internally consistent.

There will be a bunch more articles to come detailing all those small annoyances
I talked about earlier, and how I'm addressing them. For the rules, I'm going to
use GURPS, which is something I've done before for the standard setting with
good results.

The series is named _Overthinking Shadowrun_. The end result is named _Sinless_.


[^1]: The Ares Predator is Robocop's gun, assault cannons come from the same
    movie, and I'm pretty sure there's more than one version of the assault
    rifle from Aliens in there.

[^2]: Guess what I'm going to commit myself to do by the end of this article.

[^3]: Second Edition, if you're curious.

[^4]: Surprisingly often, the client was an underdog musician, and the villain
    an evil record company.

[^5]: Man, the Shadowrun fanbase. That's a whole other rant.

[^6]: Insert Bender joke here.
