---
layout: post
title: "Overthinking Shadowrun"
tags:
    - rant
    - shadowrun
---

My first contact with the world of Shadowrun was when I played the SNES game way
back when I was 10 or 11. I instantly fell in love with its mix of fantasy and
science fiction. About a year later I happened across a translated edition of
the RPG's Second Edition corebook, convinced a relative to buy it for me, and
became an avid Shadowrun player and GM for the next decade.

I still love the game's premise to _bits_, but I probably can't count myself as
a proper fan of the game itself at this point. This distancing wasn't just a
simple matter of edition changes. It was instead a more gradual thing, that
happened as I literally grew up and as my thinking changed.

In this article I'm going to talk about that, and on how I would change the
setting into something that appealed more to my current tastes. So hold on, dear
reader, because I sure do have a lot to say about Shadowrun.

I've been thinking this over for a long while now, but what finally moved me to
write the article was [this thread][1] over on RPG.net. Clearly Shadowrun is one
of those settings about which a lot of people have varied opinions, so I thought
I should lay my own down in a form I can link people to during these
discussions to save on typing.

## What Drew Me In?

I read the corebook when I was 11. This was before I had ever heard of cyberpunk
in any form - I didn't even know much about the roleplaying game that used that
word as its title. And these the main reasons, really.

You see, lots of people on that linked thread and elsewhere tend to talk about
Shadowrun as if it was a piece of cyberpunk literature. As in, they explain why
the current game lacks the same luster it had at the beginning by saying that
cyberpunk itself is dated, and so on.

But the truth is Shadowrun has very little to do with cyberpunk literature! It's
not like, say, Vampire, which is very intentionally written to explore the same
themes you see in vampire literature. Despite being written by intelligent
adults, the mindset behind the creation of Shadowrun is that of an enthusiastic
11 year old.
