---
layout: post
title: "The many magic systems of GURPS"
tags:
    - gurps
---

This started out as a forum post, but it grew enough in my mind that I think it
works better as a blog article.

Here's some background: in November 25th of 2020, someone started a thread in
the RPG.net forum named "What's the appeal of GURPS?" This led to quite a few
people posting to explain what's that appeal is to them, along with several
others chiming in to complain about the system.

One of my personal metrics of whether a system is good or not is how specific
and esoteric the complaints of its fans are. If any outsider can look at one of
these complaints and immediately understand their essence[^1], then the system
is probably bad. If it sounds impenetrable[^2], then we're looking at a mostly
good system whose warts only matter to people very deeply invested in certain
aspects of it.

This does present a danger, of course. An outsider who sees the impenetrable
complaint might get the wrong impression that the whole system is similarly
confusing and requires that much investment in all of its facets. I wonder if
that's where GURPS reputation as being "hard" comes from.

So, one of the complaints from the crusty veterans in that thread was that
"Magic spells have effects that are unbalanced when compared to what you can get
from advantages." This prompted the following question from an outsider:

    I don't understand the complaint. Isn't magic supposed to be about doing
    otherwise impossible things?

And this is my answer!

## The Many Magic Systems of GURPS

At this point in its life GURPS has several different magic systems! Each group
can choose the one that better fits their setting's assumptions. "Magic is about
doing otherwise impossible things" is one of these assumptions! This here is a
primer on the many magic systems of GURPS and what they're generally good for.

A note to GURPS veterans: I'm simplifying some of the terminology here on
purpose. No need to correct me on that!

### Timeline

Originally, GURPS only had a single magic system, which still doesn't seem to
have a universally agreed-upon official name since it was just "the magic
system" for a long time. I'm going to call it Spell Magic in this post for
convenience.

A little ways into Fourth Edition, Steve Jackson Games published GURPS
Thaumathology, a book that contained information on building your own variant
magic system from scratch. Using material from this book, they would eventually
publish several other "official" magic systems, which I'll describe here along
with Spell Magic.

### Spell Magic: The Original

In this system you have a leveled advantage called Magery, which measures your
magical potential. Then you have a very large number of spells, each of which is
bought as a skill. Spells are divided into a number of Colleges, and are
arranged inside each College in a manner that very much resembles an Exalted
Charm Tree. The more powerful a spell is, the more prerequisite spells it has,
and you have to learn all of them. Some spells also have a certain level of
Magery as a prerequisite.

The effects of the spells in Spell Magic are usually very specific and
self-contained, and their effects can be a bit arbitraty when compared to those
you can get from GURPS Advantages. Overall, though, they're balanced in a
standard fantasy campaign. Casting spells costs large amounts of Fatigue Points,
though high skill mitigates that somewhat. Powerful mages are very versatile,
and are either surprisingly buff or carrying lots of power-storage amulets
around.

Ambient mana level affects magic. You need at least some ambient mana to cast;
low ambient mana makes magic harder; higher than normal levels make it easier,
more powerful, and more unpredictable.

A reduced form of this system is included in the core books. A supplement named
GURPS Magic repeats the basic rules for it, adds a few more, and has the full
grimoire. Dungeon Fantasy uses it for its Wizards, and adds a slight variant for
its Clerics and Druids, who don't need to bother with the prerequisite trees but
have a smaller spell list.

### Sorcery: Magic As Powers

The GURPS core book has a very large number of advantages in it, both mundane
and fantastical. The fantastical ones are usually stuff you could see an exotic
alien or magical creature possessing, like the ability to teleport, turn
invisible, or shoot gravity bolts from your appendages.

You could add these advantages as written to a character or creature, or you
could make them part of a _Power_ . A "power" is a group of related abilities
with a common origin. They're a little cheaper to buy, but are susceptible to
whatever measures might exist to counter the source of your power. For example,
you could a character with the three example abilities above has Magic Powers!
They pay less points for those abilities, but is susceptible to mana level as
described in Spell Magic, and to having their powers dispelled.

"Magic as powers" has been a popular idea since 4e was launched and introduced
the idea of power sets: this would be a setting where all magic used this model,
and the standard Spell Magic system was nowhere in sight. Lots of people built
homebrew magic systems using these guidelines. Steve Jackson Games eventually
published their own official take on it with the Sorcery supplement, and that's
what this system has been called ever since.

This system has an expensive leveled advantage named Sorcery, which determines
your overall power level. Individual spells built as "magic powers" using
advantages, and they can't cost more than your Sorcery advantage did. You then
buy them at a huge discount which means you can only use one of them at a time.

Characters built using this system have a handful of potentially very powerful
spells that they can use all day without limit, and a few less powerful effects
they can improvise. Point-wise, they're also more or less automatically balanced
with other "powered" characters that get their abilities from other sources like
psionics or exotic biologies. So Sorcery-using magicians end up being
appropriate for, say, super-hero campaigns where point budgets matter a lot to
the group.

### Ritual Path Magic

Ritual Path Magic, or RPM, is another magic system introduced with the GURPS
Monster Hunters line. It later got its own book as well, and is inspired by some
of the guidelines in GURPS Thaumathology.

A Ritual Path magician learns several skills representing their knowledge of
different _Paths_ of magic. Depending on the specific setting, there might be
only 8 to 12 Paths in total, each with a very broad area they cover. They can
use these skills to perform _rituals_ whose effects

[^1]: "Wizards and clerics are so powerful they make the other classes useless."
[^2]: "Lifting capability would be better represented by a logarithmic function
    instead of a quadratic one."
