---
layout: post
title: "RPG Cyberpunk"
tags:
    - gurps
    - cyberpunk
---

A while ago I talked about [why the essence of cyberpunk is still relevant][1],
and why overly focusing on the props in its classic stories is the wrong way to
look at the genre. It got a more explosive response than most posts I write for
Octopus Carnival, which meant this one guy made a vehement Facebook comment
about it.

The dude in question argued very forcefully that cyberpunk was indeed completely
obsolete and wrong-headed, and he cited a list of "silly" tropes to make his
case. Stuff like Cybernetics Eating Your Soul, and Cartoonishly Evil
Corporations.

Of course, it turns out that all of these things are about as part of the
essence of cyberpunk as the existence of the Soviet Union, which is to say _not
at all_. These tropes are barnacles that stuck to the hull of cyberpunk when it
made the journey from books to roleplaying games, and I didn't talk about them
in my first post on the subject because I'm going to talk about them now.

That first cyberpunk roleplaying game is 1988's Cyberpunk 2020[^1]. It was
released a scant few years after Neuromancer, but it already diverges from the
themes of literary cyberpunk in ways that will have tremendous impact on all
future games.

## The Barnacles

### Style Over Substance

The first is that it holds up visual style as the most important thing about the
genre, enthusiastically engaging in the sort of prop fixation I talked about in
the previous post. As far as I know the "style over substance" maxim originates
in this game, not in the books that inspired it. You don't play CP2020 because
you want to meditate on what the bleak future depicted there says about your
present. You play it because you want to be a cybered-up badass with an armored
leather jacket and computerized mirrorshades.

From CP2020 on, the word "cyberpunks" began to refer to, well, cybered-up punks
in the minds of roleplayers[^2]. Now they had a specific look they had to copy
if they wanted to be in-genre, just like you had to have knights in plate and
wizards in flowing robes when playing D&D.

As I said back in the first post, this fixation not only on visual style but on
the very specific visual style of Cyberpunk 2020 is a big part of why a lot of
people consider cyberpunk to be a "retro" genre these days. I would say it even
washed back into literature and became one of the reasons why "post-cyberpunk"
is seen as a separate genre despite being largely about the same themes[^3].

It was also at the root of the Great Shadowrun Edition War when its Fourth
Edition was published in 2005. They tried to modernize the look of the game
somewhat, with the introduction of powerful mobile devices and ubiquitous
wireless networking. The cries of "this is not Shadowrun/this is not cyberpunk"
from traditionalist fans could be heard around the world, even though the
technology imagined in that edition was quite prescient.

### Cyberware Makes You Less Human

This trope was R. Talsorian's next big contribution to the genre of "RPG
Cyberpunk". I'm guessing it started innocently enough. Cyberware in this game
makes you powerful. If you have "too much" cyberware you become "too
powerful". Therefore we need a limiter on the amount of cyberware you can cram
into a character. Money doesn't quite work for this because PCs are expected to
get rich over time. We have to use something else.

And so the Humanity rules were born. Each piece of cyberware has a "Humanity
Cost" that's directly proportional to how powerful it is. As the total Humanity
Cost of your implants mounts, your Empathy stat falls, making you worse at
handling social situations. When it gets to 0 you become an NPC mass-murdering
maniac.

There's a whole clinical-sounding section in CP2020 about how the human psyche
isn't really capable of coping with the presence of cyberware, and how it makes
one feel isolated from and "superior" to their peers. That was just a crummy
justification for the inclusion of these balance-enforcing rules, really -
explicit separation between mechanics and fiction wasn't a popular concept in
tabletop RPGs back then.

Shadowrun would not only ape this trope when it released not long after, but go
even further by saying that cybernetic implants _literally eat your
soul_. Install too many and you die because you run out of soul. No, your soul
doesn't grow back even if you remove the offending implants; yes, it makes
relating to people harder because they can sense you're a soul-damaged
abomination; yes, that nose piercing also costs you a bit of your soul.

This particular barnacle became so associated with the cyberpunk genre as a
whole that it seems to have ended up as one of the foundational grievances of
transhumanism, which reacted to it by basically agreeing that augmentations make
you less human, but then saying that being human wasn't all that to begin
with. In real life, of course, you have plenty of stories of people who felt
_more_ human after acquiring prosthetic limbs or other therapeutic implants.

## Cartoonishly Evil Corporations

Literary cyberpunk never viewed large corporations and billionaires in a
positive light. Again taking Gibson's work as an example, there's this phrase in
Count Zero that applies to everything the man wrote: "The very rich are no
longer even remotely human." Yeah, you read that right: what makes you less
human in literary cyberpunk isn't an excess of implants, but an excess of
wealth! You could very well say that the real villain of literary cyberpunk is
_capital_.

The translation to gaming didn't quite contradict this statement, but it
simplified it quite a bit. CP2020 and Shadowrun lay the blame for the woes of
their worlds on the shoulders of a specific set of 8-10 mega-corporations.


[1]: {{ "/2018/12/13/on-cyberpunk.html" | absolute_url }}

[^1]: Which started out as Cyberpunk 2013 but didn't take too long to gain its
    more famous name.

[^2]: It might come as a surprise that it didn't use to mean that, but as far as
    I'm aware it was commonly used to refer to the _authors_ of the cyberpunk
    movement and not to its protagonists. They were "punks" because they were
    rebelling against the science fiction establishment of their time. And no,
    they didn't really like the word, or use it themselves. At least until one
    of them used it as the title for a short story about yet another type of
    "punk": an annoying 13-year-old boy who hacked his father's bank account.

[^3]: This is however an entirely uninformed opinion. If you have citations
    agreeing or disagreeing with me, please send them over!
