---
layout: post
title: "The Scavenger's Guild"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

Trying to squeeze every coin you can out a delve is a time-honored PC tradition
in dungeon fantasy games. Beyond the obvious coins, gems, and magic, dungeons
tend to be full of _stuff_ that could fetch a decent price back in town if you
managed to bring it back. Stuff like the well-preserved arms and armor worn by
those skeletons you just fought. Or the big stack of iron rations and barrels of
wine from the cultist pantry. Or that fancy king-sized bed from the evil
wizard's quarters.

From the point of view of the players, all of that is extra money. From the
point of view of the GM, it is instead a major annoyance. Players will spend
valuable session time arguing about logistics, and asking the GM about the stats
of of stuff the GM didn't think to stat up. Can we remove those sculpted bronze
doors to the sacrificial chamber? How much do they weight? How much are they
worth? What's the going wholesale rate on cheap wine again?

Old-school D&D tried to avoid this issue by making all treasure quite heavy by
default. Ten coins to a pound means you should only take stuff that's worth as
much or more than its weight in cash. Less valuable stuff is not worth it. Newer
editions had lighter treasure but tended to state that anything without a listed
value is too shitty to bother with.

As Peter V. Dell'Orto points out [here][1] GURPS has a little more trouble with
it. Its money is extremely light. A king's ransom in gold fits inside a backback
and the barbarian can carry it without breaking a sweat. Also a lot of things
that would be considered cheap trash in other systems can be worth some real
money here. An example is an average-quality mundane broadsword, which a typical
delver can sell for $240 back in town. Why not take a brace of them back if you
have the carrying capacity?

A possible solution to the issue is to just lean into it and bring a Scavenger's
Guild into your game.

## Origins of the Scavenger's Guild

Computer-based RPGs suffer from the trash loot problem for the same reasons
GURPS does, but even more so because their money tends to be _weightless_. The
Scavenger's Guild is a solution proposed by **Solasta: Crown of the Magister**,
and it could work on the tabletop too.

Dungeon Delving in Solasta is a bit more of an organized activity than in lots
of other settings: you're exploring a ruined empire on behalf of that empire's
successor cultures, and there are several organizations backing and assisting
you in that effort. The Scavenger's Guild is one of them, less official but no
less important.

The way it goes is you delve an imperial ruin. You take the coins, the magic
items, and the portable archaeological treasures the scholars back home will pay
a lot for. Then you notify the Scavenger's Guild, and in a few days they swoop
into the now-safe dungeon with a full logistics train and cart away everything
else. They sell it off through their contacts, take their percentages off the
proceeds, and give you the rest as a finder's fee.



[1]: https://dungeonfantastic.blogspot.com/2021/10/gurps-dungeon-fantasy-session-159-cold.html

===

The Scavenger's Guild is a setting element from the PC game **Solasta: Crown of
the Magister**. It poses a very elegant solution to the ages-old issue of "trash
loot" that keeps coming up both in computer and tabletop RPGs.

You probably know how it goes. PCs go on an adventure; PCs fight and defeat a
group of enemies; adventure grinds to a halt as PCs begin stripping defeated
enemies of their gear and making plans to drag all of it back to town for
resale.

From the players' point of view, doing this is smart. This stuff might not be
worth as much as actual treasure, but it is worth _something_. And when you're
starting out, every extra copper coin you get allows you to upgrade your gear
that much earlier.

From the GM's point of view the practice is bothersome, because it tends to add
more logistical bookkeeping to the delving process for relatively little
gain. It takes up valuable session time and can grow particularly annoying if
the GM feels the group should already have outgrown their penny-pinching phase.

The traditional solutions of making this stuff too bothersome or too worthless
to bring home don't always work. Some players are really obstinate! Talking to
them about campaign expectations works better, but it might cause some
disappointment at first. With the Scavenger's Guild, you can instead make the
process of looting "trash" more convenient and streamlined!

## How the Scavenger's Guild Works

As a professional delver, you're keenly aware of the potential value of every
piece of loot within a dungeon.

===

Finding neat and valuable treasure is half the fun in a dungeon fantasy
campaign, but anyone who's been playing those for a while has certainly run into
(or been!) the sort of player who takes this to extremes. They'll strip defeated
enemies of their weapons and armor. When they find one of those food storehouses
that usually gets placed in dungeons as a nod to verissimilitude, they insist on
knowing the exact monetary value of all that hardtack and wine, as well as that
of the barrels they're stored in. And they'll spend hours making plans for
dragging all of that stuff back to town on their own.

On one hand, this drive is understandable. Every copper coin counts when you're
a cash-strapped starting character, and those enemy mail shirts and broadswords
are indeed worth good money in GURPS! On the other, this can kill the game's
momentum and chew up valuable session time that could have been spent having an
exciting adventure and finding _real_ treasure.

Traditionally, GMs have tried discouraging this behavior by emphasizing the
worthlessness of this loot, or the difficulty of dragging it back home. The
hardtack is old. The wine is sour. The swords and mail are shitty. And even if
they aren't that magic necklace you heard about is worth more than all the other
stuff combined. Why don't you go after it instead?

This approach tends to have mixed results, as certain players are _really_
obstinate about looting everything they can. If some of those are in your group,
you might get better results by introducing the Scavenger's Guild in your game.
