---
layout: post
title: "Meditations on Size Modifier and Melee Combat"
tags:
    - gurps
---

This post doesn't try to break new ground - rather, it's a reflection on a set
of existing rules any veteran GURPS player will be aware of. I myself was only
vaguely so, and had to look things up to be certain. So I'm writing the results
of my research here for my own future reference.

Size Modifier is a concept introduced by the GURPS core rules to handle objects
and characters of vastly varying sizes. Things or creatures that have a Size
Modifier of 0 are approximately human-sized. Larger things and creatures have a
positive SM; smaller creatures have a negative SM. This factors into combat, but
how?

This is spelled out in the core books, but the way it's written there had me
confused for a while. So the rest of this article has my final interpretation
based on the core rules, on the optional material on [this FAQ entry][1], and on
consultations with strangers on Discord.

## Ranged Combat

Ranged combat works with "absolute" SM: just add the target's SM to your attack
roll regardless of your own size.

**Example**: A SM -2 combat drone fires a rocket at a SM +3 robot tank. The
drone has a +3 bonus to its attack roll due to size. If the tank survives and
tries to destroy the drone, it will have a -2 penalty to its attack roll.

## Strikes In Melee Combat

By the book this uses absolute SM exactly like the ranged version: add your
target's SM to your attack roll. This works fine when everyone is human-sized or
close to it, but might give bizarre results in more extreme scenarios.

To address this, the FAQ introduces an optional rule where you use relative SM:
add the difference between combatant SMs as a bonus to the smaller one and as a
penalty to the larger one. In this case the bonus for the smaller combatant
can't exceed +4. Punching a wall four times bigger than you isn't harder than
punching a wall ten times bigger.

I don't exactly know how that limit interacts with hit location penalties. Is it
+4 after hit location, or before? I don't know what the official answer is, but
I feel it should be after.

**Example**: A SM -6 pixie duels a SM +2 giant! Using absolute SM, the pixie has
a +2 to hit the giant, and the giant a -6 to hit the pixie. Using relative SM,
the giant has a -8 to hit the pixie, and the pixie has a +4 to hit the giant.

If the pixie targets the giant's skull, she'd get a net +1 under my
interpretation. In other words: go for the eyes, Boo!

## Grappling

By the book, if you're larger than your target you add the difference between
your SMs to the attack roll. Online consensus between the three people that
answered my question online is that this _replaces_ the striking modifiers.

**Example**: If that giant tries to grapple the pixie instead of striking her,
he will do so at a +8 bonus instead of a -8 penalty! If the pixie for some
reason tries to grapple the giant, she will do so at no penalty (but won't get a
bonus either).

## Other Considerations

There's whole lot of other considerations here, a lot of which are further
examined in the _Combat Writ Large_ article in Pyramid #3/77. Ground-bound tiny
opponents might have trouble hitting certain locations of a larger foe. A
large enough size difference might mean the larger foe deals large-area injury
to the smaller one. Here, I was mostly concerned with getting the basic skill
modifiers right, but I recommend that article for people who want to get deeper
into it. Perhaps I'll write something about it in the future.
