---
layout: post
title: "Skyrim Metallurgy Makes No Sense"
tags:
    - gurps
    - skyrim
---

It's true! Any similarity between the smithing mechanics of Skyrim and the real
thing are a mere coincidence. I mean, yeah, fantasy games like to include
artifacts made out of mythical materials, but Skyrim goes the extra mile by
naming its magical metals after completely different real-world
substances. In the real world, ebony is a type of wood and refined malachite is
technically known as "copper".

This means that adapting this stuff to GURPS is a bit tricky, since GURPS hews
much closer to the realistic end of the spectrum even when in Dungeon Fantasy
mode. But we'll try anyway!

The descriptions below should be appropriate for direct inclusion in a GURPS
Dungeon Fantasy game either set in Tamriel (the Elder Scrolls setting) or
inspired by it. The descriptions tend to focus on armor and weapons, but the
cultural notes can easily be extrapolated to non-combat gear as well.

## A note on Iron and Steel

Despite being considered "low-level" by the computer game, steel is a perfectly
good material for armor and weapons both in the real world and in DF. "Pure"
iron isn't quite as good, but the difference in quality usually isn't enough to
make a difference in the rules.

## Tamrielic High Elves

Tamriel's High Elves, also called Altmer, consider themselves direct descendants
of the gods who were unjustly stripped of their immortal status when the world
was created. Their civilization has a distressing tendency to produce
imperialistic elven supremacist movements who believe ruling over the "lesser
races" is their birthright. Items of Altmer make tend to be extensively
decorated with wing and solar motifs. As members of a highly magical and highly
snobby culture, high elves also enjoy using expensive and "impossible" materials
in their crafts.

Aldmeri armorers tend to eschew ferrous metals in their product. Instead they go
for bronze... when they can't get their hands into anything fancier. A lot of
Altmer weapons and armor are made from something they call "refined moonstone"
(treat as Fine Shell), and higher end items are made of tempered glass. All are
frequently carved with reliefs, silver-plated, gilded, or inlaid with expensive
materials like gold or enchanted quicksilver. Aldmeri gear doesn't carry an
inherent Cost Factor due to its provenance, but all that bling tends to result
in a fairly high CF anyway. Enchantments are common, and then more towards
flashy elemental effects than other more discreet magic.

Most Aldmeri armor is their particular variant of Elven Mail (see below), and
melee weapons tend to be one-handed swords, knives and fencing weapons. The
preferred ranged weapon is actually hurled Missile spells, but Elven bows are
used by specialists.

### Game Effects

Aldmeri bows and mail armor obviously count as Elven. Aldmeri "elven mail" is
actually a suit of lightweight plates. This allows it to take other modifiers
that would apply only to plate, but forbids it from taking other modifiers that
would apply only to mail.

Tempered glass weapons are discussed in DF 8, p. 33. Tempered glass armor is no
different from the base model in game terms, has +6 CF, and makes you look like
you're wearing a Tiffany lamp. This modifier can be applied to plate or scale
armor.

## Tamrielic Dwarves

Also called Dwemer, the dwarves of Tamriel are actually a type of elf. Or were,
rather. Their whole civilization just up and vanished one day, leaving behind
lots of mostly-intact underground ruins. Their ruins are full of steam-powered
machinery and lit by still-functioning gas lamps. Their taste in decoration runs
towards abstract geometric designs: squares, circles, and more complex forms
made of straight lines and sharp angles. Their helmets always include full-face
protection, sculpted to look like actual faces.

Dwemer machinery and gear is made of an advanced metal alloy no other Tamrielic
culture knows how to make, though techniques for working the stuff have been
recovered here and there. Many adventurers take up the profitable and risky
business of delving into Dwarven ruins to strip them of their metal fittings and
decorations for smelting into something that can be worked at a forge.

Genuine ancient Dwarven gear in working order is highly prized by scholars and
collectors, who will buy it as it if had an extra +3 CF. Modern stuff made from
pieced-together techniques and scavenged materials is sold at normal prices.

The Dwemer were the first people to develop full suits of plate armor in
Tamriel, and they apparently didn't bother wearing anything else to battle. The
most popular melee weapons were one-handed axes and maces, though swords were
also made. These were used along with metal shields. The most popular ranged
weapon was the crossbow, which came in a multitide of models of varying
complexity. Enchantments tended to be discreet and utilitarian - Fortity on
armor, Accuracy/Puissance on weapons and so on.

### Game Effects

Plate armor made with Dwemer materials and techniques counts as Dwarven, as do
unbalanced melee weapons. A few rare Dwemer items were made from Orichalcum.

## Tamrielic Orcs

Tamrielic orcs are your typical Proud Warrior Race Guys. They respect martial
prowess, distrust magic, and are superb smiths. Their taste in decoration can be
summed up with one word: spikes.

Orcish blades are usually serrated (DF Treasures 1, p. 20). Orcish armor tends
to be plate or segmented plate, and it's usually Spiked. Most such gear is made
of plain steel, but is often Fine or better. Orc armorers are also very fond of
Meteoric Iron, and Orichalcum to a lesser degree. Equipment of Orcish make is
almost never enchanted.
