---
layout: post
title: "So You Want to Be a Space Detective"
tags:
    - gurps
    - tokusatsu
    - adaptation
---

Picture if you will a galaxy-spanning civilization. It's not a heavily
centralized empire, but a collection of hundreds of more or less independent
worlds. Most of these planets are home to a sapient species. These species are
overwhelmingly humanoid in shape, and many (but not most) of them look
remarkably similar to humans.

These many indepentend worlds and species have over time banded together into a
Galactic Federation. This supranational body exists to foster cooperation
between its member worlds and to solve issues that affect them as a whole (with
each individual world being responsible for its own internal issues).

It's quite possible that the formation of this Federation was rife with the sort
of petty political dispute we frequently see among our own real-world nations,
but everyone involved is way past that these days. The Federation is a stable
and effective body, and its members are all the better for it. Their main source
of headaches in these peaceful times is not war, but _crime_.

You see, the Federation is plagued by several galaxy-spanning criminal
syndicates that engage in all sort of nastiness, from arms smuggling to horrific
experiments and slavery. They're adept at maintaining cohesiveness and secrecy
across interstellar distances, and at keeping one step ahead of any coordinated
efforts by each planet's law enforcement agencies to take them down. After all,
space gangsters have to deal with far less bureaucracy and don't care about
jurisdiction at all.

The Federation needed a better way to fight these criminals, and so it
established the Galaxy Police. Its membership was drawn from the top officers in
all the worlds' agencies,
