---
layout: post
title: "Star Wars: The Force Belongs to Everyone"
tags:
    - gurps
    - star-wars
    - opinion
---

Most of my experiences playing Star Wars RPGs were with the classic system from
West End, years ago now. A few sessions under a couple of different GMs, both of
whom were big fans of the setting and the system. I'm sure my impressions in the
rest of this post are a mix from the actual game text and from the GMs in
question. It's been a while.

The memory that sticks with me the most is that the game put us players in a
state of constant "Jedi tension". It both sold Jedi as the most awesome
character type in the entire galaxy, and strictly forbid players from being
one. As a game written in the late 80s/early 90s, it placed a lot of importance
on Canon with a capital C. And since there wasn't much of an "extended universe"
back then, Canon meant the original trilogy of movies.

By default, campaigns in that game took place either shortly before Episode IV,
or somewhere during the original trilogy. The authors had decided the only Jedi
left in the Galaxy were those that appeared on-screen, and so therefore players
couldn't make Jedi characters. Oh, there were rules for Jedi, because they had
to show stats for the canonical characters, but you couldn't actually play one.

Want to make a new, heretofore unknown Jedi survivor? You can't, there aren't
any! Want to play one of the canonical characters? You can't, they're Canon NPCs
and therefore both untouchable and much more awesome than you can ever hope to
be. The closer you could get was to play a "Force-sensitive" character who was
either completely untrained, or belonged to some quirky alien tradition that
escape the Empire's purge by sheer luck. You were distinctly second-fiddle to a
proper Jedi. And yeah, even though Luke himself fit the "untrained sensitive"
category, it would take around 10 years of weekly sessions for a starting PC
with that archetype to reach Luke's official stats.

I think a bit of this attitude might have ended up being inherited by subsequent
games in the franchise, because the implementation they go with is very similar
even when it's not as restrictive. Jedi are the best at using the Force. No
other class or archetype can do it at all, save perhaps for the weaker "Force
Adept" that acts as a consolation prize when Jedi aren't playable.

Anyway, as you might have guessed from the rant above, I'd do things differently
if I ever GMed a Star Wars game. In short, the Force would really work as
advertised in A New Hope: it connects everyone in the galaxy, and therefore it's
present on everyone in the galaxy.

## How does this work?

Under this model, the ability to sense and interact with the Force is not a rare
hereditary trait, but something anyone can learn with the proper training. And
"the proper training" does not necessarily mean _Jedi_ training.

Focused training and practice on nearly any skill will eventually awaken you to
the Force, and a lot of disciplines were developed around these skills over the
galaxy's long history. Someone who gets good enough at basically anything will
begin learning and consciously using Force tricks and techniques to become even
better. None of this "subconscious and intuitive usage" that past games have
tried to do.

A lot of stuff that used to be exclusive to the Jedi becomes much more
widespread. Pilots and gunslingers can benefit from enhanced reflexes and
short-term precognition, artisans and engineers enter deep meditative states
that let them create masterworks, hackers develop machine empathy, and so
on. This is all normal and traditional. Everyone can develop basic sensing and
intuition abilities. Jedi still exist but are distinguished more by their ideals
than by their special powers.

In your typical cinematic action campaign, anyone who's badass enough to be a
player character is also badass enough to be a Force user on par with a Jedi in
standard games. In GURPS many of the traits that allow a character to be
considered a cinematic hero are conscious expressions of the Force. Examples
include Trained by a Master, Gunslinger, Wildcard skills and even high levels of
Talent that push skills beyond what's realistic. So are traits like Intuition
and Empathy. Such characters would also have access to more explicitly mystical
powers.

Of course, it's not unusual for NPCs to be Force users either, even if they're
not conventional heroes. PCs might quest to find a powerful seer, or to have
their equipment built or improved by a master crafter, or there might be a
freighter pilot who isn't a conventional ace but can conceal their ship from
enemy sensors and sneak past blockades.

### What about Droids?

One advantage of this variant setup is that it allows us to neatly resolve an
issue which I've always considered kinda problematic in this setting: the issue
of droid rights.

In most Star Wars works, droids tend to be treated like property. Even by the
protagonists, and even when everything else about the story shows them to be
people with their own minds and emotions. Even characters who consider
individual droids to be friends don't seem to have anything against their
overall treatment.

I've seen people online try to justify this by saying that droids aren't really
people, they're just tools with convincing natural language interfaces, and
therefore it's okay to buy, sell, and memory wipe them at will. But some stories
go to such lengths to show otherwise that I'm not inclined to believe this holds
true for every single droid in the galaxy.

In my version of the setting, most droids start their existences as clever tools
built for a specific purpose. However, their artificial brains are capable of
learning and it's relatively common for them to cross the threshold of full
sapience. This can happen quite quickly in models programmed to execute complex
tasks - particularly astromech, protocol, and medical droids. Others might take
longer, but they can still get there.

Awakened droids are considered living people for all intents and purposes,
_including in regards to the Force_. Anyone who's Force-sensitive can detect
them as living beings, and the droid might itself become Force-sensitive without
issue.

There are only two ways to prevent a droid from awakening. The first is to build
it with a processor too simple to be called a "brain", like those Roomba-like
things that wander Imperial installations. The second is to actively prevent the
accumulation of meaningful experiences via regular memory wipes, which is the
sort of thing bad guys do.

### Speaking of bad guys... what about the Empire and the Sith?

In standard Star Wars, the Empire is more or less the antithesis of everything
that is good, and it would be so even if there were no Sith involved in running
it. It ticks all the fascism boxes, and the fact that it does so is a conscious
decision on the part of the writers going back to George Lucas himself. Any
portrayal that tries to say they maybe have a point is at best incorrect. The
First Order from the sequel movies is pretty much a warmed-over Empire and so is
just as bad.

In our variant setting, where everyone has a connection to the Force and this is
seen as a good thing, the Empire adds a strong "Force-elitist" streak to its
long list of bad traits. In a galaxy where everyone is Force-sensitive, the
Empire believes the Force should be the exclusive domain of a chosen few. And
this elitist ideology is what distinguishes the Sith from all the other
Force-using evil factions.

The Empire seeks to suppress knowledge of traditional Force training methods
among its occupied worlds, and it trains its soldiers in ways that limit their
skill with the Force in several ways. Stormtroopers are completely blind to it,
and the sort of villain who gets a name and a special uniform might have some
skills that aid their primary function, but only "Proper Sith" get full training
in a style descended from traditional Jedi techniques. That group is technically
made up of only two people, but the Rule of Two exists to be broken and both of
them are going to keep several secret apprentices around.

Inquisitors are a bit of a special case. They're still limited, but the training
they do get is focused on combat and sensing other Force users. They're going to
lack the full range of esoteric techniques an unrestricted Force user might
develop, but they're still pretty dangerous in a fight.

The signature Sith technique, the one they developed themselves and forms the
basis of their thinking, allows them to leech the Force from others to boost
themselves. Everyone who serves them is taught to open themselves up to
this. It's a twisted form of communion or battle meditation, in that it hurts
the many to enhance the few.

### What about the Dark Side?

There are still plenty of villains, and a lot of them are certainly skilled
enough to use the Force in their evil, and it's certainly appropriate for them
to be commonly known as adepts of the dark side... But I'd say that a lot of the
time the actual abilities they use are similar to those of the protagonists. The
Enemy Ace uses the same powers as the Heroic Ace, only he chooses to use it to
further the goals of a fascist empire or to bomb innocents and so on.

Just as the Jedi are one tradition among many, the Sith can be another, but once
again a lot of the stuff that used to be unique to them is more
widespread. There's more than one villain our there who causes grievous
imbalances in their own Force meridians in order to gain an increased ability to
hurt people, and they don't necessarily call themselves Sith.
