---
layout: post
title: "Evil Minions of the Universe: Stormtroopers"
tags:
    - gurps
---

I've decided I'm going to write a few posts about villainous mooks found in
several science fiction universes. The first one deals with Star Wars'
stormtroopers, one of the most classic. Most people likely to read this will
hardly need an introduction to stormtroopers, but I'll provide one anyway.

## Overview

Stormtroopers are the foot soldiers of the evil Galactic Empire that appears in
most Star Wars media. They're instantly recognizable by their white armor suits
with their face-concealing, vaguely skull-like helmets. They always appear in
large groups, commanded by officers in gray uniforms or directly by big-name
villains like Darth Vader.

The first Star Wars movie, A New Hope, describes them as having a fearsome
reputation. In practice, though, they're classic mooks, and the most they
accomplish against the film's heroes is making those heroes look badass.

Though they're not the first Space Mooks, they're one of the classics and likely
the first ones most of us were exposed to. The dissonance between their
reputation and their skill on-screen has been the subject of many jokes over the
decades, including an official GURPS cinematic rule named "Imperial Stormtrooper
Marksmanship Academy", and one I wrote named "[Imperial Stormtrooper Armor
Drills][1]".

## Lore Analysis

Saying that Stormtroopers and the Empire they serve are inspired by the Nazis
doesn't really capture how heavy that influence is. They pretty much _are_ Space
Nazis, from the way they're organized down to how their officer uniforms
look[^1].

It's probably not intentional on George Lucas' part, but that link helps explain
why there seem to be so many types of troopers and other Imperial soldiers. The
way the historical Nazis worked[^2] was by by creating parallel organizations
that would serve as the "inner circle" that held the real power and influence in
an area. And after a while, when that circle got too influent, they'd create
another one and spread that _this_ was there the real chosen ones were.

The regular army's no good, all the really loyal badasses join the
stormtroopers/brownshirts. Then suddenly the brownshirts aren't "it" anymore,
and the real inner circle is the SS. And I think there were a few other
iterations like that before they were all stomped flat in WW2. It's worth
nothing that the members of such "inner circles" weren't necessarily more
_competent_ than their pleb colleagues, just more loyal to the regime.

Imperial stormtrooopers are the same! I can easily see them being the "inner
circle" to the regular armed forces, their ranks swelling with the sort of crass
bully who truly believed in the Empire's new ideals until they were the entirety
of the Imperial armed forces. Imperial Officers seem to belong to a whole other
hierarchy that gets to order troopers around, so they could have been the next
layer on the onion.

After that you get a succession of more specialized groups that vary with the
specific piece of media you're watching. Some sort of black-armored elite
trooper is almost traditional by now. Then you have a series of more specialized
groups that vary with the specific work you're watching, such as the creepy
investigators of the Imperial Intelligence Bureau or even an actual Inquisition
full of Dark Side Force users. The franchise usually seems to buy into the
statement that the people in these innermost circles really are more competent,
so when they appear they tend to be named villains.

Similar instances of this pattern appear in works that take place before the
Empire rises or after it falls. The "prequel" era has Clone Troopers that get
brought in to replace the original armed forces of the Republic, and turn evil
at the end of that arc. They fight armies of droids that fulfill the exact same
Space Mook function as stormtroopers until that point, though they're organized
along less totalitarian lines.

The First Order of the "sequel" trilogy is pretty much the Empire with a
different name, and everything I said about the Empire applies there. It might
be at an earlier stage of the nazi onion since they still have powerful officers
among the troopers (like Commander Phasma), but the parallel officer corps with
their Hugo Boss uniforms is already there and growing.

## Trooper Gear

The Star Wars franchise is pretty much the archetypal TL 11^ space opera setting
in GURPS terms. Most of the gear for that combination of tech level and science
fiction flavor is taken straight from it and given wink-wink-nudge-nudge
names. So you don't have to do much in order to build a catalog of stormtrooper
gear.



[^1]: This is why I believe any work that tries to portray the Empire in a
    sympathetic light is missing the point.

[^2]: According to Hannah Arendt's _On the Origins of Totalitarianism_, which I
    bet you didn't expect me to reference in an article about Star Wars.

[1]: {{ "/2020/10/27/stormtrooper-armor.html" | relative_url }}
