---
layout: post
title: "Ultra-Tech Dungeon Delving in GURPS"
tags:
    - gurps
    - dungeon-fantasy
---

I've recently been thinking about dungeon fantasy campaigns which feature
tech-level mashups instead of the usual "medievalish" setup. Could be it's
because I'm GMing one. Let's talk about it for a bit.

Let's say you have a Dungeon Fantasy game where you want your characters to get
into contact with more advanced technology. How would you go about it?

## Ultra-Tech Delving: A Survey

Steve Jackson games did a little foray into this area in Pyramid #3/60, in an
article entitled "High-Tech Dungeon Crawl", which focused on bringing modern-day
characters with guns into fantasy dungeons to mow down orcs with autofire and
take their stuff. This raises the inherent level of colonalism in the genre from
"faintly concerning" to "yikes!"[^1].

What I want to focus on here is in an older variation on the theme: fantasy
characters exploring "dungeons" filled with elements you might be more used to
seeing in science fiction stories. When I say "older", I mean it's _older than
D&D_: Dave Arneson's Blackmoor campaign featured a whole ultra-tech city-state
descended from the crew of a crashed spaceship, and it was played for several
years before what became the OD&D rules were finalized and officially
published. D&D proper would explore the same territory with its famous
"Expedition to the Barrier Peaks" module.

Pathfinder dedicates a whole kingdom in its setting to the idea: the land of
Numeria is a barbarian kingdom where a giant spaceship crashed millenia ago,
breaking up during atmospheric entry and scattering its many modules all over
the region. And, of course, in Gamma World and other post-apocalyptic games
_all_ "dungeons" are ultra-tech because they're the ruins of the futuristic
civilization that preceded the apocalypse.

## Ultra-Tech Delving in GURPS

GURPS is of course a uniquely well-suited system for this kind of thing. Its
rules already support a wide range of genres and technology levels from the
corebook onwards. We only need a few adjustments depending on the sort of
campaign we want.

_After The End_ already deals with the post-apocalyptic angle and offers a set
of detailed rules. What I want, however, is something simpler and more suited to
a Barrier Peaks/Numeria scenario. The ultra-tech stuff is alien, but characters
can gain an understanding of it with some investment, and the gap between their
usual medievalish milieu and the lofty heights of alien tech isn't completely
impossible to cross. How would I do it?

### Tech Level, or the Lack Thereof.

So on one side we have the usual "medievalish" dungeon fantasy setting. In
GURPS, that's roughtly TL 4, but without gunpowder. On the other side we have a
space-opera intrusion, which corresponds very roughly to a TL9-10 selection with
a few outliers (personal shields are TL11-12, but they fit the flavor). With
these vague numbers in mind, we can ditch the concept of Tech Levels completely
for our treatment!

Default GURPS Tech Level rules are only useful for giving us a starting set of
ultra-tech gadgets to work with. In actual play, the only thing that matters is
if a given thing is "low-tech" and thus familiar to everyone, or "high-tech" and
thus a mystery to the uninitiated. How to differentiate both? With the following
advantage:

### Tech Familiarity (10 points)

You have a layman's knowledge of the basic principles behind the advanced
technology scattered through your otherwise medieval fantasy world. You
understand why it isn't magic. You know about electricity and how it powers
high-tech devices. You grasp enough of the high-tech design aesthetic to easily
spot a device's charging port or battery, its control surfaces (be they
switches, triggers, or touchpads), its information displays, and its business
end even if you don't know what the thing actually _does_. You can identify the
high-tech civilization's writing even though you can't read it, and you can
identify its iconography for "danger".

This is a form of Unusual Background that makes you immune to the sort of
amusing accident which plagues low-tech unfortunates confronted with high-tech
devices. You can also recognize hazards like exposed live wires, recognize which
type of power cell goes into a device, and plug it in.

More importantly, Tech Familiarity is a pre-requisite for learning high-tech
skills, and the language of the high-tech civilization (if any). With this
advantage, you can spend points on those things normally.

Yes, this is quite similar to High TL from the core book, but much cheaper. The
reason is that paying 30-35 points in High TL to get the same benefits is way
too expensive for a campaign in this mold. This advantage doesn't give you any
familiarity with deeper aspects of the high-tech civilization, just what's in
the first paragraph.

### Tech Skills

Skills that would require a /TL specialization in standard GURPS rules have only
two versions here: standard (no suffix) and "/Tech". That way, you don't need to
change anything about how you write down a standard "medievalish" character.

The two specialties don't overlap at all: they don't default to each other, and
can't be used at all across the "tech divide". If you only have standard
Lockpicking, you can't open a high-tech door with a magnetic lock. If you only
have Lockpicking/Tech, you can't open low-tech mechanical locks with
old-fashioned picks, tough you might be able to operate a machine that does it
for you.

High-tech weapons are usually firearms of beam weapons - the skills to operate
them properly are always "/Tech" skills. High-Tech _melee_ weapons are a
possible exception to the "no defaults" rule above, though the GM would need to
rule on each case:

Weapons that use the same skill as their low-tech counterparts can be used
normally by anyone if the only difference is in their construction (such as a
superfine or hyperdense blade). If they have some additional feature that
requires power (such as a vibroblade or shock baton) then the character has a -2
penalty to use that feature unless they have Tech Familiarity. If they require
an exclusive skill to operate (like a force sword or monowire whip) then that
skill has the "/Tech" suffix. You might be able to get away with a default to a
low-tech skill here, but the only way to improve on that is to buy Tech
Familiarity and the high-tech skill.

### Ultra-Tech Gear

With the character stuff out of the way, we can talk about the goodies! As I
mentioned above, one advantage of GURPS is that it has entire books of high- and
ultra-tech gadgets that can be plugged straight into your fantasy
campaigns. Therefore, we don't need to talk about how to stat this stuff up at
all! What we _do_ need is talk about the effects it's going to have on your
campaign, which in turn will aid you in selecting which items to include.

#### How much is this stuff worth?

A vital question in the dungeon fantasy genre! Going more or less by the book,
high-tech items should be worth roughly 30 times their list price in a dungeon
fantasy setting. That makes even a relatively innocuous gadget into a major
piece of loot!

This might seem a bit too much for a dungeon fantasy setting where magic and
magic items are relatively common, but I think it kinda makes sense. Ultra-tech
items are going to be a lot rarer than magic items, particularly in settings
where they come from that single crashed spaceship. They work regardless of the
local mana and sanctitiy levels. And they can be enchanted! These are exactly
the same reasons why a suit of fine plate armor costs more than a standard suit
enchanted with Lighten 1.

**Example**: A superfine broadword would cost $3600 in its native ultra-tech
society. Recovered from a crashed spaceship in a dungeon fantasy setting, it's
worth $108,000!

That sword gives a +2 bonus to damage and a (2) armor divisor. The closest
"low-tech" equivalent would be a very fine sword with a Penetrating Weapon
enchantment, worth $17,000, almost ten times cheaper. Even if all the bonuses
were from magic, it would still cost only $25,600. However, the superfine blade
will lose none of its functionality in a low- or no-mana zone, and it could be
enchanted with the same magic as the low-tech sword to become even better.

#### Timeworn Gear

One concept from Pathfinder that's useful to borrow is that of timeworn
items. In Barrier Peaks-style setups, most of the high-tech stuff the PCs come
across has been sitting around in derelict ruins for a very long time; even if
it was very well-built, it might not have withstood the passage of the ages
intact. To model that, we introduce the following equipment modifier:

**Timeworn**: This can be applied to any high-tech armor, weapon, or device that
requires power or ammunition to function. These items can't be recharged. After
whatever reserves they contain when found are used up, they'll break down and
become useless. They may also have other quirks arising from their almost-broken
state at the GM's discretion. Divide final price by 10.

#### Weapons and Armor

Weapons and armor deserve special mention because Dungeon Fantasy is a
combat-heavy genre, and this combat has a very specific "feel" to it. Therefore,
high-tech combat gear will have an outsize impact on it.

Introducing ultra-tech armor in the game likely means you've decided to ignore
Dungeon Fantasy's suggestion to cap DR at about 15. Even non-combat safety gear
at these tech levels has as much DR as low-tech plate, while being much
lighter. Proper combat armor is much tougher. Most of the published DF enemies
will have trouble getting past the DR of a PC in full ultra-tech armor with
their physical attacks.

Similarly, high-tech weapons can change the shape of combat in your
campaign. Dungeon Fantasy usually considers melee to be the main event and
ranged combat to be a specialist niche, but if guns and beam weapons are common
these two are going to swap places. Monster DR becomes much less of an obstacle
when every weapon the PCs wield has an armor divisor.

The first step when addressing these issues is to carefully consider which items
are available. What do you want your campaign's new DR cap to be? What is the
highest armor divisor you're comfortable with? What sort of maximum damage do
you want your PCs to do with a ranged attack they can use every second? And, to
quote Mister Torgue from Borderlands 2: EXPLOSIONS?

That leads to some thinking about who the previous owners of this tech
were. What was their civilization like, in general terms? This will inform the
purpose of most of the facilities they left behind. The loot from a civilian
medical lab going to be very different from that of a military base.

The passage of time will also influence this. Sure, this ruin might have been a
military base, but it turns out their best hardware was never intended to last
for three thousand years without maintenance and is mostly useless now.

What was the purpose of the crashed spaceship or ancient facility the PCs are
delving?


[^1]: The article itself includes a section titled "The Sociological
    Ramifications are Appalling".
