---
layout: post
title: "Dragon's Dogma Bestiary: The Undead"
category: gurps
---

In Gransys, the word "undead" applies to those walking corpses more commonly
known as _zombies_ in other media, but here we use it in the more traditional
Dungeon Fantasy sense to encompass all sorts of horrors from the grave. Undead
make up a large enemy subtype that remains relevant all through the original
game, so any discussion of them necessarily involves spoilers.

Undead in Gransys are generally similar to those found in countless other
fantasy settings. They infest any place that has seen a great deal of death and
not much in the way of ritual purification, or where dark forces are actively at
work. Since many dungeons fall into both categories, they tend to have a lot of
undead.

These creatures tend to be more active at night, and while it's common to find
large groups of undead they rarely cooperate with other types of monster, which
they view as targets just like any other living creature. In large dungeons,
undead and living monsters tend to have distinct territories and keep to them,
with the occasional fight redefining their borders.

## Zombies

There's little to say about the zombies of Gransys that hasn't been said a
thousand times elsewhere. They're slow, they moan a lot, they come in large
numbers and they like holding you down and biting you to death. The Horde
Zombies from **GURPS Dungeon Fantasy 2** and the Servitor Zombie from **DF 9**
should do nicely to represent the bulk of them. Of note is that Gransys zombies
are usually _not_ infectious. They rise because of necromancy, ambient dark
magic, or divine curse, not a plague. Of course, an industrious coven of
necromancers could still get a zombie infestation going by doing all the
animating themselves.

Interesting zombie variations include:

- Zombie Warrior: Increase ST and give them skill equal to DX with a
  weapon. Give them a suit of armor and a weapon covered by the skill.

- Giant zombie: _Double_ ST, increase SM to +1, and add Resistant to Turning
  (+3).

## Skeletons

Common skeletons are little more than faster, more fragile zombies, but they get
interesting rather quickly. Like zombies, they don't keep any of the original
person's memories or personality, but they do often retain their skills!
Skeletons that rise from old battlefields tend to be skilled soldiers. Old
temples and mage towers will often contain skeleton _wizards_. None of them can
improve on these skills after death, but if a 400-point delver falls in the
depths of a death-tainted dungeon, they're likely to become terrible monsters.

Basic skeletons were commoners in life, and follow the Servitor Skeleton
template from **DF 9** without any weapons or other equipment. For more
dangerous specimens, create a human opponent and apply the Servitor Skeleton
modifiers as a racial template. Using some of the ready-made
opposition [here][1] works, but unique high-point skeletons also exist.
