---
layout: post
title: "Gear From Warframe for GURPS"
tags:
    - gurps
    - equipment
    - warframe
---

I really like Warframe's setting, but I kinda balk at making a full adaptation
of it for a few reasons.

First and foremost, adapting the warframes themselves is going to be quite hard!
They look like "mere" advanced power armor at first glance, but each one is more
like a whole Supers character that you can wear as a suit.

Second, the setting's lore is kinda nebulous and in flux. You can get a very
general idea pretty quickly, particularly with the new intro they recently added
to the game, but several important details are Big Reveals that I hesitate to
spoil to people who never played the game.

Still, I really want to do something with it in this blog, so I figured I'd
start with the easy parts. I'll start with a very general setting overview
containing only things that are true as of the original game's start. Then I'll
adapt some of the gear used by most people in the setting (i.e, those that don't
have access to warframes).

## Setting Overview

Warframe takes place in the Origin System, which is our good old Solar System a
few thousand years and a couple of apocalypses from now. The situation here is
vaguely similar to that in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire. The
"Empire" in question was ruled by a culture who called themselves the
Orokin. They fell a few hundred years ago, and we're now getting to the point
where its successor states are willing to go to war to build empires of their
own, trampling anyone smaller than them.

Most of the system looks very different from what we're used to in the real
world, because the Orokin completely wrecked it during their ascent to power and
their restoration efforts have been running unattended for centuries.

Earth is mostly covered in forests of giant gengineered trees, and no longer has
a moon. Venus is now a cold planet dotted with pockets of warmth maintained by
heat generators. Mars is still a desert, but one with breathable atmosphere, a
complex ecosystem, and many Petra-like ruins belonging to a long-extinct
civilization.

There are two "great powers" in this setting, both of whom can trace their
origins to Orokin subject peoples. There are also a host of smaller cultures
oppressed by these powers, or trying to avoid their domination.

## The Great Powers

I call these two cultures "Great Powers" because they have a presence throughout
the whole system, control lots of territory, and have powerful militaries. Their
technology isn't as advanced as that of the Orokin in their prime, but it's
still pretty good and they have vast industrial bases.

These powers look at each other with hostility and everyone else with aggressive
expansionist ambition. In the moment in time we capture here, they're in a state
of cold war but still honor their deals with each other. That war turns hot
right in the video game's introductory quests, though.

### The Grineer Empire

In GURPS terms, the Grineer are bioroids. Their name for themselves is probably
derived from "Genetically Re-engineered" or something of the sort. They were
originally created and mass-produced by the Orokin as a source of industrial
labor, and later repurposed to work as soldiers when their masters found out
they were also pretty good at that.

With the fall of the Orokin the Grineer were finally free of their long
enslavement, but they used this newfound freedom to organize themselves as a
authoritarian and militarist empire. They're currently ruled by twin Queens who
are said to be immortal.

The Grineer managed to reverse-engineer the process for making more of
themselves, but only to an extent. Most individuals suffer from a variety of
physical or mental defects, which they mitigate with cybernetics. It's rare to
find a Grineer who doesn't have at least one cybernetic limb replacement. Most
of their current research efforts are geared towards perfecting their cloning
technology and correct their genome, but this has so far eluded their best
scientists. It's likely the Orokin deliberately sabotaged the original data in a
way they have yet to figure out.

The Grineer aesthetic can be described as "bulbous",
