---
layout: post
title: "In Which I Play (Another) Pile of Assassin's Creed"
tags:
    - wip
---

Hey there! Waaay back in 2013 I played [a pile of Assassin's Creed][1] games
here in the forums. It's been... a little while since I wrote about those, and
in the intervening time I've managed to play through _another_ pile of
Assassin's Creed.

The title that prompted me to write about this one more time is Assassin's
Creed: Origins, but I figured I'd talk a bit about some of the earlier games
before I launch into that one.

The [original thread][1] covers my experiences with the games up to Assassin's
Creed 3 in great detail, and it's still a good read. As we see there, AC3 marks
the end of Desmond Miles' story, but not the end of the franchise.

The next "mainline" title would be **Assassin's Creed 4: Black Flag**, the last
to bear a number. After that things get a bit fuzzier, but you can usually tell
the difference between a "mainline" title and a secondary one by the level of
marketing attention they get, and by the platform they target.

In the next posts I'll give you a brief summary of the games I played and a
briefer summary of the ones I didn't. I played most of these games years ago, so
my memory might be faulty. Things will get more detailed when I get to AC:
Origins.

## Assassin's Creed 4: Black Flag

So, at the end of AC3, the world is saved from a massive solar flare, Juno the
digitalized Precursor is on the loose in our Internet, and Desmond Miles is
dead. Where can we go from here?

Shortly after the end of AC3, Abstergo perfects a next-gen Animus that allows
its user to view the lives of people who weren't their direct ancestors. You
still need to extract and compile the memories from a DNA sample belonging to
the "target" bloodline, but once you have that anyone can dive into them.

This allows them to throw large teams of researchers at the problem of finding
interesting Precursor loot previously lost to history. And since they're a
megacorp, it also allows them to disguise this effort as game development!

So yeah, there's this hot new virtual reality console named the Abstergo
Helix. Its lauch title, "Liberation", made billions, and the company is
announcing an even bigger game that's going to be streamed MMO-style from its
own servers. It's going to be about pirates!

Of course, the Helix is an Animus "player" for pre-compiled and edited memory
sequences. AC: Liberation was one of the "secondary" games I didn't play, and
its events are the reason the next big title is made to be both streamed and
less interactive. It was possible to hack the Liberation game disk to show the
real memories underneath the Templar-sponsored editing.

Our modern day protagonist is a bit of a cypher. They're silent and the modern
interface is first-person with no functioning mirrors, so we never see their
face either. Also no one calls them by name. The official wiki has taken to
calling them "Noob", but I have my own pet theories I'll talk about later.

As the game starts, Noob has just joined Abstergo Entertainment as a historical
researcher for the pirate game project. They're shown around the office and
taken to their new workstation by a cheerful manager, but you can already see
the creepy cultish core lurking between the corporate veneer if you pay close
attention to the pamphlets and NDAs.

The historical research process here involves using a full-featured Animus
terminal to examine the life of a historical character from the time period the
new game ("Demons of the Caribbean") The genetic samples that act as the source
of his data come from a very generous anonymous donor known as "Subject
17". Translation: the Templars arrived at the hidden facility from AC3 some time
after the game ended, recovered Desmond's corpse, and filleted him for his DNA.

## Edward Kenway's Story

Edward Kenway is Haytham's father and Connor's grandfather, but here we're
watching his early life before he had kids. He was born in Wales and went to the
Caribbean in 1710 or thereabouts to escape a life that... wasn't exactly /bad/,
but which had way too much honest work and way too little lavish wealth for his
tastes. He went to find his fortune and pinky promised to his wife that he would
return in two years even if things didn't work out. Spoiler alert, he breaks
that promise.

Edward becomes a crewman in a pirate ship, and eventually takes part in a
disastrous storm-tossed raid in which he's the only survivor. During this raid
he manages to gank a traveling Assassin. From the assassin's belongings, Edward
learns that the victim was on his way to meet up with a bunch of bigwigs,
including the governor of Cuba. The dead Assassin was going to sell them a bunch
of papers and this weird glass sculpture thingy for a lot of money. So Edward
dons the dead guy's Menacing Hood, grabs the stuff, and goes to the meeting in
his place.

The bigwigs are a who's who of Caribbean colonial authorities. They are also
Templars. Dead guy was a traitor, you see, and the papers contain information
about the whole Assassin operation here in the Caribbean. Even Kenway thinks
they're a bit too evil, but being ignorant of the whole Templar/Assassin thing
he goes through with the sale. Part of the deal also has him help kidnap a man
named Bartholomew Roberts, whom the Templars call a "Sage".

Not satisfied with the size of his new bag of money, Edward tries to sneak back
into the Governor's mansion to free Roberts and see if he can get paid for it,
only to find out the dude already escaped. Kenway is caught and locked in a
slaver fleet, but he escapes with the help of fellow captive Adewalé. They steal
a small ship and leave. Kenway names his new ship the Jackdaw, and makes Adewalé
his quartermaster/first mate. He is now a Proper Pirate.

If we're being honest about it, the main draw of this game is really Being a
Pirate, with the Templar/Assassin conflict being a distinctly secondary
thing. Kenway lives through the last decade of the golden age of piracy and
befriends and/or fights pretty much every major historical pirate of the
time. He takes part in both the rise and fall of the pirate republic of Nassau,
arrives just a bit too late to save his buddy Blackbeard, and his main Assassin
contact turns out to be Mary Read in disguise.

Mary takes Edward to meet Ah Tabai, the region's Mentor, who ends up determining
that he wasn't a Templar, just an idiot. Kenway learns that the Caribbean
Templars are after a Precursor facility known as the Observatory, which is
located in Tulum and protected by Assassins. They need the Sage because only the
Sage knows how to open it and operate it. It would be Very Bad if the Templars
managed to gain access to it, since it can be used to spy on absolutely anyone
on the planet if you provide it with the target's blood in one of those glass
thingies.

Edward isn't really on board the whole "Assassin Creed" thing, though he doesn't
want to antagonize them either. He has plenty of reason to go after the Templars
himself, so he ends up helping the Assassins when their interests align.

To progress the game's main plot, you need to kill every one of the Templar
bigwigs who was in that fateful meeting. There are also significant sidequests
that deal with helping out the many Assassin operatives exposed by the traitor's
papers. And you can also, of course, just sail the Caribbean seas and attack
merchant or navy ships using an improved version of the super-duper-awesome
naval combat mechanics from AC3. As I said before that's the selling point of
the game. It helps that they have a whole library of sea shanties you can have
your crew sing with the press of a button.

The first Templar Edward kills owns a big plantation, and Edward takes it over
after he dies (freeing the slaves and replacing them with paid employees in the
process). That gives us access to Black Flag's management minigame, where you
build a trade fleet that sails all over the world transporting valuable
merchandise and engaging the competition in abstract naval battles. You can use
the money this gives you to buy better gear, enhance your ship, and make
improvements to your manor and to the small village that surrounds it, giving it
better shops and such.

As I said before, the Sage's name is Bartholomew Roberts. Near the end of the
game we also find out he's known as Black Bart, one of the age's last famous
pirates. He wasn't important or famous when we first met him, but he apparently
had a piratical career as meteoric in its ascension as Edward's in the
intervening decade. The two of them make a deal to open the Observatory and sell
it to the highest bidder, but Bart backstabs him because of course he does.

You see, the Sage is a genetic reincarnation of a Precursor. Juno's husband, to
be specific. At first I thought that was Tinia/Jupiter (because mythology!), but
apparently they'd decide it was someone else later in the franchise, a guy named
Aita. Remember how AC3 mentioned the Precursors worked on a genetics project as
one of the attempts at preventing/surviving the ancient apocalypse that took
down his civilization?  This is the result: fragments of Aita's DNA are spread
through humanity, and when enough of them come together over the generations you
get a Sage.

Bart/Aita's opinion of baseline humanity is about as low as that of his fellow
Precursors. All he's interested in is freeing his beloved Juno from her digital
prision, something he hopes the Observatory will help him accomplish. In other
words, he's in it for himself and betrays both the Templars and the Assassins to
get at the Observatory.

Due to his betrayal, Edward gets to spend some time in prison, and is sprung out
by Ah Tabai. The Mentor enlists his help in freeing Mary Read and Anne Bonny,
our last living Friendly Pirates, but they end up dying in prison or during the
escape attempt. After this happens, Edward Kenway finally comes around to the
Assassin point of view and is formally sworn into the Order, just in time for
the final confrontation.

After defeating Bart in the game's hardest personal-scale battle, Kenway
finishes off the Templars and destroys the Observatory. A little while later he
gets a letter saying that his wife back in Wales is dead, and his daughter
Jennifer Scott is coming to meet him. In due time, he hands his manor over to
the Caribbean Assassins as their new base and returns to London to become a
Proper Gentleman. We last see him going to the opera accompanied by his daughter
Jennifer and his younger son Haytham.

Out-of-game materials tell me that years later, Edward would get involved in yet
another Assassin/Templar struggle that would lead to his death. An older Haytham
ends up joining the Templars as a means to seek revenge against those he deems
responsible, thus landing us in the opening sequence of AC3.

### The Thrilling Modern Conclusion

As you progress in the game, Noob often unplugs from the Animus for a bit. You
get to read e-mail, wander the office, and notice a whole bunch of strange
things.

Our old friends Shaun and Rebecca are here, attempting to infiltrate the
building. They have inside help from the mysterious "John from IT", who in turn
recruits our Noob once they begin to realize how weird a workplace this is. Over
time, John gives Noob increasingly broad security clearances on the Abstergo
systems, which allow them to access new areas of the office and snoop into more
people's workstations. The data Noob uncovers is a good primer on the
overarching plot of the franchise, and there's also a set of recordings about
the tragic story of intrigue, infighting, and unethical experimentation behind
the Animus project in general, and the version that allows us to view other
bloodlines specifically.

By the time Kenway is nearing his final confrontations back in the past,
Abstergo starts getting wind of all those hacking sessions Noob has been helping
with, though the company still have no idea who is behind it all. When the big
boss disappears (in a Watch Dogs crossover - taking this guy out is a mission in
that game), they get really paranoid and lock all employees in a bunker until
they find out who the hacker is.

Fortunatley, for John From IT has Noob's back. He raises Noob's security
clearance as high as it can go, allowing them to leave the bunker and finally
access the core of the Animus data center. He says this is necessary to erase
the traces of their snooping, but once Noob reaches the place they're greeted by
Juno herself!

Looks like John's original plan was to get Noob here, to this place, at this
time, so Juno could download herself into their body. But either modern human
technology is not yet up to the task, or Juno herself is still too weak, because
she realizes the download is impossible and leaves.

Shortly after this Noob meets John in person for the first time. He wants to
kill Noob to cover his tracks. The reason the game didn't show us his face
before this is that he's the spitting image of Black Bart, which means he's a
Sage too. John is very distraught at not being able to meet his wife in the
flesh, but at least he has some chance of doing so in this lifetime if he can
just kill this failure of a researcher and pin everything on them.

Fortunately for Noob, a squad of fully armed Abstergo Security goons burst into
the office and kills John. This is the first time in the entire franchise I'm
happy to see a squad of fully armed Abstergo Security goons.

The whole hacking scandal gets pinned on John alone, so Noob goes back to their
normal job. Shaun and Rebecca contact them directly later on, with profuse
apologies because they didn't know about John's true nature. The Researcher
knows enough now that they willingly agree to keep helping the Assassins. I
guess they eventually leave the company, but for now you get to return to the
Animus and keep sailing the seas of the Caribbean for as long as we want.

An interesting reveal here at the end, from some of Black Bart's and John's
lines, is that there is a _third_ super-secret faction at play in our grand
conspiracy game: the "Instruments of the First Will", who exist to fulfill the
goals of the Sages and are more than happy to play the Templars and Assasins
against each other in order to do it. You can't have a proper conspiracy story
without Illuminati in it, can you?

### My Impression

I liked this game quite a lot! I found its framing device very flavorful, and of
course I had a blast sailing and hearing sea shanties. The plundering part was
more or less secondary to me, though the boarding actions were very fun as
well. Edward himself is less moral than your typical Assassin for most of the
game, but he makes up for that with a healthy dose of Ezio-like roguishness.

Combat was a bit similar to AC3's, with a few improvements. Edward is much more
of a sword-and-gun guy than Connor, and he makes better use of firearms through
the classic pirate tactic of carrying a brace of pistols in a
bandolier. Character progression is entirely gear-based much like in AC3.

The climbable architecture is usually far from impressive. Most of the
settlements are wooden fishing villages with low houses and the occasional
walkway. The buildings in the big capitals are pretty and colorful, but not very
tall. The tallest structures are the forts and the assorted ship masts. And of
course the Observatory itself is literally the parkour section to end all
parkour sections in this game.

## Freedom Cry

Assassin's Creed: Freedom Cry is an "expandalone" spin-off of Black Flag. It
focuses on Adewalé, and takes place around 15-20 years after the end of Black
Flag. There's no modern-day framing device.

Adewalé is a full-fledged Assassin by now, captaining the Jackdaw himself, and
he involves himself in a nascent island-wide slave rebellion in Haiti. I barely
remember what the Templars were doing here, because I was having too much fun
stabbing slavers.

Real-life Haiti had one of the world's most brutal slave-holding regimes at the
time, and in the game version you can't cross a street without spotting someone
holding a slave auction, or a bunch of thugs running after an escapee, or
another situation like that. Walk away from the city center and you'll find
large plantations full of enslaved workers and evil overseers. Get aboard the
Jackdaw and you'll find the seas around the island crawling with ships whose
holds are full of captives.

As usual, I guess "diegetic" Adewalé was a lot more discreet and stealthy than
me. My reflexes were still fresh from the main Black Flag story so I just moved
around murdering every slaver in sight along with the inevitable wave of guards
that showed up afterwards.

The overall tone of the story here is a bit mixed, because Adewalé really gets
into the whole rebellion thing, but we're about 50 years too early to witness
the rebellion that _succeeds_. So his enthusiasm ends up getting curbed when he
bungles a transport ship raid and gets all of the captives killed. In the end
our protagonist succeeds in solving whatever the Templar-related plot here is,
freeing some people, and keeping the existing resistance healthy, but we don't
get to topple the French colonizers in this one.

Adewalé is notable for being the first historical protagonist who is not one of
Desmond's ancestors. As far as I know none of the ones in the following games
are either.

## Renegade

This was a game that existed but I didn't play it because I don't like playing
Templars. It's the story of a dude named Shay Cormac, initially an Assassin who
defects to the Templars when the Assassins do him wrong. I _think_ it takes
place between the Haytham and Connor segments of AC3, and ties into why the US
Assassins are near extinction when Connor arrives at Achilles' house.

The framing device here is another first-person cypher (not the same Researcher
from Black Flag) getting Animus training and becoming a Templar operative.

## Unity

AC: Unity was supposed to be the start of a new trilogy for next-gen consoles,
with a brand new engine and everything. This is another game I didn't play,
because it got enough negative PR to keep me away from it.

Much of the backlash was caused by the lack of playable female characters. Unity
is a game that takes place in Paris during the French Revolution, and it tried
to bring back the AC: Brotherhood-style multiplayer mode. Brotherhood had a good
selection of female characters to choose from, but Unity had none and I think
its Assassin minions in single player were all male too. When asked about this,
Ubisoft answered that it left women out because they were "too difficult to
animate".

I also heard complaints that they made the mistake of having the Assassins back
the monarchy during the French Revolution, which is ass-backwards to say the
least, but I can't really comment much on it since I didn't play the game
myself.

The framing device is that we're kind of a "slacktivist initiate" working for
the Assassins, a former civilian recruited through the internet by a woman named
Bishop. This is where my pet theory comes in: I'm fairly sure Bishop is supposed
to be Noob from Black Flag. She bears an uncanny resemblance to Juno but is
confirmed to not be Juno, so it makes sense the Sage would try to download Juno
into her body.

She replaces "Erudito" as the "chief mysterious hacker" of the Assassins. Looks
like Erudito was revealed to be an independent hacker collective in other
"non-mainline" games, but I'm willing to bet it was led by John from IT because
one of the possible translations of Erudito is... Sage!

The modern-day plot is all about the Sage too. Abstergo learned a Sage was
active during the French Revolution and we need to prevent them from finding his
remains. Oh yes indeed, we're very lucky they didn't figure out John was a Sage
before shooting him dead and disposing of the body.

The historical plot seem to have been of middling quality. The historical
protagonist is a guy named Arno Dorian, who stumbles Forrest Gump-like through
the main events of the French Revolution and the Terror while seeking revenge on
the people who killed his father. The guy ultimately responsible for Arno's woes
turns out to be the Comte de St. Germain, and the Sage around which the game
revolves.

In the end we find that the Comte's body is hopelessly lost among the thousands
of skeletons that rest in the Paris catacombs, which means Abstergo has no hope
of ever finding it. Even if they did, his DNA is likely too degrated to be read
by an Animus. Remember this last sentence for later.

## Syndicate

This one I played, and it's pretty nifty.

### Modern Plot

The framing device is the same: we're the same Initiate from Unity, Bishop is
still our handler. We're after the location of a very specific artifact: a
Shroud of Eden.

I think the Shroud was first mentioned in the Subject 16 data dump from AC2,
where it was revealed to be both the Golden Fleece and the "original" Shroud of
Turin (it was stoken and replaced with a fake in the Middle Ages). It looks like
a piece of golden cloth, but it's a superscience healing device. You wrap your
patient on it, and it heals them completely at a cellular level. It can even
bring the recently deceased back to life, and I'm sure the franchise is not
going to come any closer to the religious implications of that particular
factoid than it already has.

Due to Previous Franchise Shenanigans in a Facebook game of all things, the
Shroud we're looking for is the _second_ one built by the Precursors. The first
one was special because it contained the mind of its creator, and you could talk
to him while the artifact was bringing someone back from the dead. It got
destroyed when the Abstergo lab that contained it was blown up. The second
Shroud doesn't have a mind emulation in it but has the same healing
properties. It was lost to history but the Templars and Assassins are racing to
find it. The last records of its location point to London in 1868, so we're
going to dive into the memories of two Assassin twins who were active back then:
Jacob and Evie Frye.

### The Plot

Our twin protagonists have, er, twin objectives: to free London from Templar
control, and to find the Shroud of Eden hidden in the city before the Templars
do.

London is fully under Templar control as the game starts. Each of the city's
districts is home to a Templar official who oversees a given aspect of their
operations. It's also protected by a contingent of Blighters, a large
Templar-controller criminal gang.

Jacob, as the brawny and reckless twin, thinks all of this Precursor bullshit is
nothing but old myths and superstitions, so he focuses on building up a criminal
gang named the Rooks to take down the Blighters and the Templars who benefit
from their protection.

Evie, as the brainy and careful twin, thinks the Precursor stuff is of vital
importance and believes playing gang warfare will accomplish nothing by
itself. She focuses on partnering with fellow assassin Henry Green (born in
India, currently living in London) to track down clues to the Shroud's
whereabouts.

This difference of opinion drives a bigger and bigger wedge between the two
siblings as the game progresses. Jacob is efficient at driving the Blighters out
and killing their Templar bosses, but he tends to leave horrible messes behind
that Evie has to spend time fixing. Evie's adventures always give her new
information about the Shroud's location, but the hard evidence she turns up
always ends up getting destroyed by events or stolen by Lucy Thorne, her Templar
foil. This means she never has anything that can be used to convince Jacob that
the search for the Shroud is not a waste of time.

By the time they're ready to personally confront the city's top Templar,
Crawford Starrick, the only thing they can agree on is that this is their last
mission together, and that they'll go their separate ways after it's over. The
confrontation takes place during a ball at Buckingham Palace, because that's
where the hidden vault containing the Shroud is. After a few tense infiltration
scenes, the twins fight Starrick inside this vault, after he's managed to wrap
himself in the Shroud.

The fight goes very badly at first, because the artifact's healing powers
instantly remove any wounds Starrick suffers. In the end they manage to remove
the Shroud and kill him for good. We get a happy ending here as the twins
finally see eye to eye, and reconcile. They reseal the Vault with the Shroud
inside.

That last reveal takes us back to the present and to an extended cutscene of a
second big fight inside the vault, as the modern Assassins and Templars reach it
at about the same time. Our heroes manage to kill Ardant, but Violet da Costa
escapes with the Shroud. We don't get a win in this one, but at least no one
died.

Why do the modern Templars need the Shroud? Well, they've given up on finding a
modern Sage, but they realized that the Shroud can rebuild people at a cellular
level. So they want to use it on some relatively intact Precursor DNA to build
their own resurrected Precursor! They still don't have everything they need, but
now they have the Shroud.

We end on a final wheels-within-wheels note, in a sound recording that reveals
Violet is a double agent and her real boss is Juno. Juno orders her to continue
helping the Templars out, because her own goal is to acquire a brand-new flesh
body.

### Side Quests and DLC

Aside from the main plot, you also get a few side quests involving famous
historical characters. Some of them were originally part of store-specific
DLCs, and some involve people you first meet during the main quest. Those tend
to be a lot of fun!

You can help Charles Darwin get one over his detractors; debunk the supernatural
with Charles Dickens; help Karl Marx dodge the cops; and finally solve a series
of murders using deductive reasoning as a very young and a-historical Arthur
Conan Doyle witnesses your work and becomes inspired by it. Over the course of
the main story, you also meet Florence Nightingale and a few others who I've
probably missed.

There's also a glitch in the Animus in one edge of the map that takes you to
World War I! In this area you play as Lydia Frye, Jacob's granddaughter, and get
to help a young Winston Churchill repel a German assault on London. This portion
of the game mostly ignores the level-up mechanic by setting everyone (Lydia
included) to level 6 and providing you with a fixed equipment set. It ends in a
confrontation with an "incomplete" Sage who was among the many German spies in
the city, but I don't know if that has any repercussions later on.

You do get to shoot down biplanes with anti-air guns, and completing all the WWI
missions nets you an anachronistic semi-auto pistol for use in the Victorian
period.

The major piece of DLC for this game is a Jack the Ripper expansion, with a new
story taking place in 1888 where you play an older Evie who's recently back from
a prolonged stay in India.

This DLC introduces a lot of new mechanics in the form of a set of fear-based
techniques and gadgets that are meant to be used both in open combat and during
sneaking sequences. Panicked enemies become much weaker and might run away from
the field entirely, which is cool. However, the game tries to make you use the
new stuff by making the old stuff useless.

Evie is level 10 in the expansion but loses access to her top techniques and to
some of her main story gear. The enemies are level _11_, which Evie can't reach
herself. This means you need to use the new fear-based shenanigans to survive
combat. I found them way too finnicky and was a bit annoyed at the loss of my
preferred tactics from the main game, so I quit this before I got through the
plot.

From reading about it I learned that Jack the Ripper in this story is a former
disciple of Jacob and Evie, who uses those same fear-based techniques in a much
more lethal way, and that the twins are trying to take him down.

### General Gameplay Impressions

The biggest mechanical innovation here is that we have multiple playable
protagonists. The excuse for this is that we're looking at both twins' memories
at the same time. I get the impression Ubisoft did this to redeem themselves
from the "animating women is hard" fiasco from Unity. If so, they succeeded.

You can switch between Jacob and Evie at will during the game's open-world
segments and side-quests. Each of them also has their own set of main quests,
and when you activate those the game switches to the appropriate protagonist
automatically.

I guess the next-biggest innovation is the skill tree and leveling system. It's
possible this one debuted in Unity, but this was my first contact with
it. Quests now give XP. Each 1000 XP gives you a skill point to spend on the
tree. When you spend a certain amount of skill points, you level up. Both twins
share the same tree, but each has a couple of exclusive "capstone" skills that
fit their preferred tactics.

The skills either improve your base numbers (do more combat damage, take less
damage, make less noise when sneaking) or add some familiar capabilities that
used to be either automatic or acquired through the story in earlier games (like
double assassinations). Jacob gets an extra tier each of the "do more damage"
and "take less damage" skills. Evie gets an extra tier of throwing knife mastery
and a stealth skill that effectively gives her Predator-like optic camouflage
while she remains still!

The bit I don't like are the levels, because they tie into the combat system in
a way that I find overly restrictive. Levels go from 1 to 10, and you can't use
weapons or armor that are higher level than you. Also, the difference between
your level and your opponents' is the main factor for determining how much
damage you deal and take when fighting them. Same-level enemies are an okay
challenge, and that's where gear and skills matter the most. Lower-level enemies
are pushovers. A Level + 1 enemy is significantly harder to fight than a
same-level one, and a bigger gap usually means you need to run away.

Open melee combat tends to be a bit hard. Enemies are generally immune to the
"instant kill" maneuvers common in previous games until you manage to bring them
to a "near death" state. Even strong weapons take a long time to do this with
normal attacks. There are several skills that allow you do bring an enemy to
Near Death instantly in specific occasions, and you need to practice those a lot
if you want to do well in big brawls.

There are three different types of melee weapons: brass knuckles, sword canes,
and kukris. You can only equip one at a time, and each handles differently. You
also have access to repeating guns for the first time in an AC "past" sequence,
most of them revolvers. Guns are of course very lethal, but also very loud.

If your main weapons disappoint a bit the secondary gadgets more than make up
for it. They take the arsenal on this game to almost "Revelations" levels of
awesome. The traditional Hidden Blade becomes only one of the many gadgets
embedded into an "Assassin Gauntlet" that also ends up acquiring launchers for
grappling hooks, ziplines, and poison darts, as well as an ascent device that
allows you to travel upwards or sideways in those ziplines.

You also get smoke bombs, throwing knives, and electrical grenades that shock
everyone in an area (except you, because you wear insulated boots). I still
think the customizable bombs, hook blade, and parachutes of Revelations are
cooler, but the spread here comes real close.

London looks very atmospheric, and also extremely climbable. We're finally back
to a setting that's built up enough for you to make extended rooftop runs, and
which has lots of awesomely tall structures to perform Leaps of Faith from. Your
headquarters this time is a moving train, which you acquire from one of the gang
bosses you defeat.

Eagle Sense is a thing as usual, working at about Brotherhood or Revelation
levels. It highlights enemies and objectives through walls but leaves the
environment dark and you can't really use it while moving. You can tag enemies
in Eagle mode so they remain visible in normal mode. Related skills make it
detect more stuff and also improve your mini-map.

All of the game's actual gameplay happens in the past. The modern segments are
extended cutscenes, since our "player character" can only watch the action
unfold via drone cameras. The field agents for this one are Shaun and Rebecca,
and they're facing the Templar Trio of manager Isabelle Ardant and operatives
Juhani Otso-Berg and Violet da Costa. I guess they appeared on previous games,
since Shaun and Rebecca seem to have quite a history with them, but they felt
more or less like generic bad guys to me and I only even learned their names
after researching the plot on a wiki.

This game ends the "Initiate" story arc that started with Black Flag if we
consider that Noob is Bishop. The existence of the Sages is our biggest reveal,
but nothing much happens aside from that. Templars and Assassins still in
conflict. Assassins win some, lose some. Templars move a step forward on their
plan to clone themselves a Precursor but are a ways away from completing it.

## Origins

Alright, we're now in "recent trilogy" territory. Assassin's Creed Origins came
out around 2017. It uses an entirely new engine and begins and entirely new
chapter in the "modern" plot.

We're back to having a defined character as our modern protagonist: Layla
Hassan. Layla is a first-generation American descended from Egyptian
parents. She's a nerdy genius who got recruited by Abstergo right out of
college. Her skills make her a major asset for Animus technology R&D, and that's
why Abstergo assigns her a job as a field operative instead. Corporate politics
in action!

Field teams like Layla's are responsible for acquiring artifacts and persons of
interest that the company's intelligence divisions track down. This is not quite
a Black Ops level thing, which is why the teams are only two people who are not
aware of the Templars. Artifacts tend to be acquired by low-level theft or
bribery, or by an illegal dig in a site the general public has not yet
discovered. Persons of interest have a DNA sample extracted and fed into the
newest iteration of the Animus, meaning no actual kidnapping or murder is
involved.

This new Animus is fully portable and fits all the necessary machinery in a box
the size of a small refrigerator. No external data centers required! It can
automatically compile a readable memory sequence from a fresh DNA sample fed
into it, and allow its user to dive into the resulting simulation. It has a
small but comfortable "bed" for the user to lie in, and transmits all
information through a weird science neural interface based on the user's blood.

Layla actually helped develop some of it, unofficially. She hoped her efforts
would be recognized and she'd be transferred to R&D based on merit. But this is
Abstergo, and we all know meritocracy is a Templar lie. Once the R&D project
manager had enough help to hit her targets, she hung Layla out to dry and took
the credit for her contributions. So now Layla and her team partner/best friend
are here in Egypt, hoping to turn a routine artifact acquisition mission into
the miracle that proves Layla deserves to be in R&D leading her own research
team.

The Animus still requires fresh DNA to compile a simulation, but Layla believes
that memory information is stored at a deeper level of quantum bullshit than
previously thought and has customized her standard issue unit to read from the
extremely degrated DNA you can find in ancient human remains and even on ancient
objects these humans handled. Her latest assignment is to head to a newly
discovered tomb in the middle of Egypt's Qattara Depression and bring the mummy
inside back to HQ. Her plan is to instead hook the mummy up to her custom Animus
and experience its life, thus proving herself right in the eyes of the Abstergo
higher-ups when she returns the data to them. And that's how we, the players,
get to see Bayek of Siwa's life.

### Bayek of Siwa

Bayek lived in ancient Egypt, but the small "a" there is important. The starting
year here is 49 BC. It's been around 300 years since Alexander the Great
conquered Egypt. Alexander died young but his general Ptolemy started a
pharaonic dynasty that has ruled the nation ever since. Ptolemy XIII ascended to
the throne recently, and is somewhat at odds with his sister and wife Cleopatra.

Egypt in 49 BC was already a land awash with ancient history, though - we're
"closer" to Cleopatra on the timeline than she was to the construction of the
three famous Giza pyramids.

Our hero Bayek of Siwa is a piece of ancient history himself. He is a Medjay, a
protector tasked by the Pharaoh with defending a specific community. The Medjays
as an institution were disbanded after the Alexandrian conquest, but the badge,
title, and training have been passed down Bayek's line since those times. It
helps that Siwa is located in an oasis far away from the banks of the Nile, so
the local culture is a bit different from that of the rest of the country.

Bayek was living a nice life. He had lots of friends and friendly neighbors,
married a nice lady from Alexandria named Aya, and was raising his son Khemu to
one day become the Medjay of Siwa in his place. Then a gang of masked assholes
ride into the town and take Khemu hostage to force Bayek to reveal the secret of
"The Vault".

Bayek doesn't actually know anything about a vault, but the Masked Assholes
think he's lying and seem a bit desperate to find this place. They're sure the
entrance to this vault is in a specific underground chamber in Siwa's Temple of
Amun, and they take Bayek and Khemu there to make them open it for them. The two
stall for a bit and Khemu manages to swipe a knife from one of the masked
assholes. Bayek uses this knife to try to fight them, but it turns out at least
one of them is actually quite a good fighter. He redirects one of Bayek's stabs
into Khemu, on purpose, and the lot of them leave town as the Medjay is left to
weep for his son.

It doesn't take long for both Bayek and Aya to swear revenge. They remember the
animal names each masked man called the others, and they go out into wider Egypt
to look for clues. A year passes.

One of the killers was called "Heron" by the others. Bayek manages to identify
him as Rudjek, a rich man who owns a natron mine near Giza. He confronts the guy
there and then chases him to the Bent Pyramid of Sneferu. Rudjek tries to throw
a knife at him, Bayek parries with the same mask Rudjek wore that day, and then
stabs him to death by bashing the mask into the man's face knife-point first.

[1]: https://forum.rpg.net/showthread.php?671579-In-Which-I-Play-Through-A-Pile-of-Assassin-s-Creed-(with-spoilers)
