---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Devil, Hellwasp"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I don't remember seeing hell wasps before, but they sound like the sort of
monster that might have debuted in 3e.

## The Lore

In past editions the Blood War was this eternal alignment-based conflict, but
here it's part of Asmodeus' safety net. You see, the other gods don't
like Asmodeus very much, both because he's an evil asshole and because he got
his position by murdering a popular non-evil deity.

One of the measures he took to prevent them from ganging up on him was to commit
the considerable armies of Hell to the task of containing the demons of the
Abyss. As we mentioned before, demons are too busy with infighting to launch
regular invasions on the rest of the universe, but when they do manage to
briefly get their shit together and spill out, they find a few legions of devils
waiting to fight them. Hell also launches occasional raids into the Abyss to
prevent demons from organizing.

This isn't a war that rages on eternally, but a series of sporadic conflicts
that flare up whenever one of the two sides feels a bit stronger. The gods lets
Asmodeus be because he provides a valuable service, and because providing that
service also serves as a check on his power. Asmodeus and his underlings in the
meantime keep enacting diabolic schemes to acquire more power in an attempt to
dominate the other gods.

One of the most enthusiastic participants in the Blood Wars seems to be Glasya,
Asmodeus' daughter. Because of this she tends to be involved in stories where
demons and devils switch sides, corresponding to her failures and successes. We
already heard about Graz'zt the devil who became a demon lord. And now we get to
hear about a whole species of demon who became devils.

Hellwasps were once a species of demon related to the insectile mezzodemons,
servants of a wasp-like demon lord whose name was lost to time. Glasya fought
and killed this demon in one of her raids, and its spawn immediately swore
allegiance to her. She took the lot of them to Hell and converted them into
devils. Now they inhabit the Garden of Delights, a region of Malbolge. As loyal
servants of Glasya, they can be found alongside any of her other servants or
allies.

## The Numbers

Hellwasps are Medium Immortal Magical Beasts (devils). They have Darkvision and
a Flight Speed of 8 (hover), but their ground speed of 0 means they can't
actually _walk_. They fight with their natural weapons: a pair of sword-like
talons, and a huge venomous sting.

### Hellwasp Colony Guard

This is a Level 19 Minion Skirmisher of the kind you can find by the score in
hellwasp hives. Their **Sword Talon** attack allows them to shift 1 square
before or after the attack, and their **Sting** deals poison damage, slows, and
prevents the target from shifting for a turn.

They're good for slowing the PCs down and setting them up to be surrounded by
sturdier allies. The ability to shift away after a talon attack makes them
slightly less vulnerable to melee-centric PCs.

### Hellwasp Devil

The regular version is a Level 23 Skirmisher with 212 HP. Since it's higher
level it probably represents an exceptional individual within a hive, of the
kind that gets loaned out to allies and sent on away missions.

Aside from a somewhat weak **Sword Talon** attack, the hellwasp can also perform
a **Talon Skewer**. This also counts as a basic attack. It allows the wasp to
fly its speed and make two talon attacks at any point along the movement. The
wasp doesn't draw opportunity attacks when moving away from the target of these
attacks. If both attacks hit the same target, the wasp grabs them, and the
**Drag Off** trait allows it to pull the grabbed victim when it moves without
drawing opportunity attacks from them.

Yes, this is another one of those fliers that allows you to have fun with
cliffs. And at epic level we're probably taking the cliffs of Hell itself, which
have lava pools or other layer-appropriate hazards at the bottom.

Hellwasp regulars also have a stronger **Sting**. It deals more poison damage,
slows, prohibits shifts and deals ongoing 15 fire damage (save ends all). This
is a "recharge 5+" attack, and a good one to use on a PC that was dragged off to
an isolated position.

## Final Impressions

Bugs with sword-arms that slot neatly into the same slot as Swordwings. Perfect
for those players who dislike monsters that lack ties to AD&D lore. You can
reskin these into swordwings, or take inspiration in swordwing abilities when
building more hellwasp varieties.

Mechanically, they're interesting without overstaying their welcome. It's always
fun to see a monster who can carry PCs off and drop them into lava pits.
