---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Crodlu"
tags:
    - dark-sun
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Crodlus are what Athas has instead of horses. Fans of Final Fantasy might
compare them do Darker and Sunnier chocobos.

## The Lore

In the wild, crodlus roam the wastes in small herds of about a dozen members,
led by a dominant female. Females make up most of the other members of the herd,
and are all related to the leader. One of the males will be the leader's mate,
with the others being mostly younger individuals who have not yet reached
adulthood. When that happens, the newly adult males set out to seek mates in
other herds.

The creatures are omnivores, with herds cooperating to hunt those creatures they
judge to be weaker or smaller than themselves, and running away from stronger
predators. They're also frequently beset by human raiders trying to capture
their young for training as mounts.

This means that crodlu are a common sight among groups of sapient
humanoids. They make for unpredictable and aggressive mounts, but those are good
traits to have in something you want to ride into battle.

## The Numbers

Crodlus are Large Natural Beasts with the Reptile tag and a ground speed of 8.

### Crodlu

This could represent a typical wild specimen, or perhaps one treated as an
attack animal instead of a mount. It's a Level 3 Brute with 55 HP.

The crodlu can attack with its **beak** or with **claws** that do a little less
damage. Whenever it can it will instead use a **Pounce**, which lets it move up
to its speed, and use both Beak and Claws against the same target even if it
stands still. If both attacks hit, the target falls prone.

### War Crodlu

This one was trained as a mount, and compares to the normal crodlu in the same
way a war horse compares to a draft animal. It's a Level 5 Brute with 76 HP.

The War Crodlu has the same three abilities described for the normal version,
and one more: **Pouncing Mount**. If the war crodlu charges a target while
mounted, its rider can make a melee basic attack as a free action against that
same target. The Pounce ability does _not_ count as a charge, but this makes the
charge of a mounted war crodlu a bit more dangerous than a standard Pounce.
