---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Nothic"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Nothics first appeared in the Miniatures Handbook for 3e, and make their 4e
debut in the MM2.

## The Lore

Nothics are aberrant creatures that first arrived in the world aboard drifting
fragments of the Far Realm. Their minds are even more alien than those of slaads
to us poor mortals. Their huge eyes are capable of inflicting a variety of
afflictions, and they tend to be found in the service of other powerful
creatures. Nothics constantly cackle and cavort about, which their masters often
find amusing, but they also fight at their command, doing double duty as jesters
and bodyguards.

Their masters aren't necessarily aberrant! Nothics are often found in the
company of undead, for example. A few get adopted by cults of Vecna and receive
numerous blessings from the lich god, becoming even more dangerous.

## The Numbers

Nothics are Medium Aberrant Humanoids. Those dinner plate eyes give them
Truesight out to 10 squares and Darkvision. They also act as the focus for a
variety of gaze attacks and psychic powers, which vary per stat block. Nothics
have a ground speed of 6.

The stat blocks in this entry range from the mid-Paragon to the early Epic
tiers. I believe the Neverwinter Campaign Setting, published much later, would
include a heroic-tier nothic as well.

### Nothic Cackler

Cacklers are some of the most "jester-like" in behavior. They caper about even
during a battle, seemingly oblivious to the opposition even as they
fight. They're level 15 Artillery with 116 HP.

Their basic melee attack is an anemic **claw** - it's all about the mind
powers with them. They can choose between two at-will ranged attacks.

The first, **Mind Rot** targets Will and does psychic damage. On a hit, it also
slides the target 6 squares and forces them to make a melee basic attack against
someone else (nothic's choice). The other, **Rotting Gaze**, targets Fortitude,
does necrotic damage, and inflicts a -2 penalty to all defenses (save ends).

Tactics are clear: rot the body, rot the mind, laugh, repeat.

If surrounded, the cackler can use a **Maddening Cackle** (close burst 3
vs. Will; enemies only; recharge 5+). This deals psychic damage, pushes 2
squares, and slides the hit targets 2 additional squares at the start of their
next turns.

### Nothic Mindblight

Behavior-wise, mindblights are the complete opposite of cacklers, appearing
sleepy and morose even while staring you to death. They're level 19 Controllers
with 180 HP. They project an **Eye Lure** aura (3) that slides enemies inside 2
squares at the start of the enemies' turns. Their **claws** are a little
stronger and also deal ongoing necrotic damage (save ends), but the eye powers
are still the main event.

A mindblight will likely open up with **Mesmerizing Visage** (recharge 5+), a
fireball-sized area attack that targets Will, does psychic damage, and inflicts
a -1 penalty to saves (save ends). The penalty worsens to -3 after the first
failed save.

Then it will move on to its at-will powers, which deal no damage but have "save
ends" riders that capitalize on the Visage's effect. **Eye of Insanity** is a
Ranged 5 attack that targets will and dominates with an after-effect that dazes
the target for an additionall turn after they make their save. **Necrotic Eye**
is a Close Blast 5 that targets Fortitude and inflicts 10 ongoing necrotic
damage (save ends).

### Nothic Eye of Vecna

For some reason, Vecna likes this nothic sub-species and heaps blessings upon
them. They often hang around his cults. They're Level 22 Lurkers with 162 HP,
and project a **Soul Decay** aura (3) that allows allied undead inside to make
free melee basic attacks at the start of the nothic's turn. So yeah, the best
place for this lurker to lurk is amid a crowd of undead melee bruisers.

The Eye of Vecna is going to constantly emit pulses of **Eye Rot** (minor
action), which targets the fortitude of every enemy within 10 squares and makes
the nothic invisible to them on a hit (save ends). This recharges when the
monster isn't invisible to anyone.

After it does that, it skitters among the enemies who can't see it using
**Mobile Melee Attack**, which allows it to move its speed and make a basic claw
attack at any point during the move, drawing no opportunity attacks from the
target. That **Claw** is pretty nasty on its own as well, dealing necrotic
damage, immobilizing, and inflicting a -2 to all saving throws. **Invisible
Advantage** gives it an additional effect against targets who can't see the
nothic, opening the target up to an opportunity attack from another adjacent
monster.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

I think the basic visual design of the nothic is quite striking, but their
mechanics don't quite do it for me just from reading them. I guess they might
feel differently in play.

Encounters with nothics are also likely to involve the powerful villains they
serve. The book gives us three:

- Level 14: A mind flayer infiltrator with an entourage of 2 nothic cacklers and
  2 war trolls.

- Level 18: 2 aboleth lashers and their 2 pet mindblights in cahoots with a
  death hag.

- Level 21: A dark naga with an honor guard of 3 bodak reavers and an Eye of
  Vecna pet.
