---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Barrowhaunts"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-barrowhaunts.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

This is an entirely original setting-specific entry. Now this is what I'm here
for!

## The Lore

The Gray Downs is a region of dreary fog-shrouded hills in the center-north of
the Nentir Vale. It contains a great number of burial mounds built by ancient
humans who lived here centuries before the arrival of the Nerathi. These hill
clans are extinct, but their ruins remain as witnesses of their existence. The
greatest of these mounds is the Sword Barrow, which sits prominently at the
center of the Downs.

The Sword Barrow is exactly the sort of place that would be considered a prime
delving spot: it reaches deep underground, its layout is complex, and it's
filled with traps and treasure belonging to the forgotten king or warlord that
rests at its bottom. It's also already "taken". If you get too close to it, the
Barrowhaunts will shank you for trying to move into their territory.

The Barrowhaunts are a group of undead revenants who used to be an adventuring
party in life.  They are themselves quite ancient, and no one knows why they
became undead. The leading rumor is that they delved the Sword Barrow and
attracted the ire of the warlord buried inside, whose spirit called out to the
hill clans and told them to come take their revenge. They answered the call, and
the Barrowhaunts preferred to slaughter them all rather than relinquishing their
loot. So yeah, they're responsible for the final extinction of the hill
clans. One of the hillfolk elders laid a dying curse upon the adventurers,
binding them to the land for all eternity.

This didn't have any obvious immediate effect, but the adventuring party did
become more and more obsessed with the region as time went by. They kept coming
back for more treasure, and attempted many delves into the Sword
Barrow. Eventually their greed surpassed their skill. After the ensuing TPK,
they got back up, now fully under the effects of the curse.

As undead, the Barrowhaunts effectively became eternal guardians of the Grey
Downs barrows, but they frame this duty in terms of their original greedy
mentality. They spend their existence delving the barrows and moving loot around
to protect it from "rivals" and "claim-jumpers", which means anyone wandering
through their claimed territory. They savagely attack any intruders and add
their loot to the pile. Somewhere in the Downs is a big stash of all the
treasure they've gathered over the ages, but no one has been able to find it and
live to tell the tale yet. It might be inside the Sword Barrow, it might be
somewhere else.

The Barrowhaunts are aided in their duty by the spirits of the creatures and
people they've killed over the ages. Many of these are hillfolk, but there are
also newer ghosts. None of them want to see the Barrowhaunts' curse end, so they
fight hard to keep them from being destroyed.

## The Numbers

The Barrowhaunts are all specific individuals! They share in common a set of
generic undead traits: immune to fear and disease, resist 10 necrotic,
vulnerable 5 radiant, Darkvision. All of their other traits come from training
or from their respective racial powers.

The lingering spirits that accompany them are Shadow Humanoids and Beasts with
undead traits. They're all minions but they have high damage resistance, making
them a lot more stubborn than most minions. Let's look at them first.

### Lingering Warrior Spirit

A humanoid spirit and a Level 7 Minion Soldier. It has immunity to disease and
fear, and Resist 15 to all damage except radiant. Their **Phantom Strikes** deal
a bit of damage and immobilize for a turn.

That damage resistance at level 7 means that fighting these things pretty much
requires someone who can deal radiant damage on demand, like a cleric, paladin
or even a star warlock with the right powers. A PC striker might be able to
brute-force them, but not consistently.

### Lingering Monster Spirit

The ghost of a non-humanoid monster. It's a Large Level 9 Minion Brute, with a
ground speed of 8 and a climb speed of 6. It attacks with Reach 2 **Savage
Strikes** that do good damage for a minion. The thing that makes it special is
Resist 20 to all non-radiant damage, which means they're almost impossible to
brute-force. Bring a cleric!

### Uthelyn the Mad

This was the Barrowhaunts' half-elf rogue. She's a Level 8 Skirmisher with 86
HP. Her **Maniacal Laughter** acts like an aura (1) that inflicts a -2 attack
penalty on enemies inside. She wields a **short sword** and can do **Mad
Slashes** with it, which let her shift 2 squares before and after the attack as
an effect, and deal bonus necrotic damage against targets that grant combat
advantage to Uthelyn.

Once per encounter she can react to an effect that would immobilize, slow, or
restrain her with a **Ghostly Escape**, which lets her end the effect and gain
insubstantial and phasing for a turn.

### Adrian "Iceheart" Reginold

This was their human wizard, specializing in cold spells. He's a Level 8
Controller with 86 HP, and is also resistant to cold and vulnerable to fire in
addition to all the standard traits mentioned above.

Adrian uses a **Frost Staff** that does cold damage in melee, and shoots tricky
**Ice Bolts** that do "cold and necrotic" damage and slow for a turn. As a
reminder dual-typed damage uses the target's smaller resistance value, so if a
PC is only resistant to cold they're going to take full damage from the
bolts. The wizard can also cast **Deep Freeze** (close blast 3 vs. Fortitude,
recharge 5+) to deal cold damage and restrain for a turn, and **Vortex of Ice**
(area burst 1 within 10, encounter) to deal heavy cold damage, slide 3 squares,
and knock prone. A miss here deals half damage and slides 1 square.

### Joplin the Sly

The party's second rogue, this one a halfling. She's a level 8 Lurker with 68
HP. Joplin gets the halfling's **Nimble Reaction** trait, gaining +2 AC
vs. opportunity attacks.

Her basic attack is a **Vanishing Strike** with a short sword, which makes her
invisible to the target for a turn on a hit, and deals increased damage when she
has combat advantage. Once per encounter, when someone hits or misses her with a
melee attack, she can use **Swift Rebuke** as an _interrupt_, making a free
Vanishing Strike against the enemy with combat advantage. Since this is an
interrupt, it can turn a hit into a miss with the full concealment bonus for
being invisible!

### Boldos Grimehammer

The party's dwarf fighter is a Level 9 Brute with 122 HP. He gets the same
resistance to forced movement and knockdowns given to PC dwarves, and fights
with a battleaxe and shield. The **axe** can be used for basic strikes or for
**Mighty Swings** that deal a little less damage and either push the target 1
square or knock it prone.

If Boldos is hit by an attack that would push, pull, or slide him, he can
respond with the **Soldier of Fortune** interrupt, which gives him a free basic
attack with a +5 damage bonus against the triggering enemy. I think this is
calculated before the dwarven racial ability applies - if you push him 1 square,
he stays put and hits you back.

### Cassian d'Cherevan

The party leader, this human warlord was probably some sort of noble in
life. He's a Level 9 Elite Soldier with the Leader keyword and 192 HP. He's
armored in plate and uses a **greatsword** to fight.

As an elite, he can make **Double Attacks** with the sword, and once per
encounter he can make a **Call to War**, which lets him attack once and allow
every ally within 5 squares to shift up to 2 squares and make a basic attack.

As a minor action he can use his **Bolstering Presence** (recharge 5+) to give
every ally within 3 squares a +5 damage bonus for a turn. And if an adjacent
enemy makes an attack that doesn't target him, Cassian can use **Relentless
Assault** to automatically deal 12 damage to that enemy.


## Final Impression

I love these dudes, because they're a very specific group tied to a specific
spot on the map. They have a history, and a concrete reason for doing what they
do. This is the sort of entry you can write when you don't have to be as generic
as possible. I also really like that they're a party of murderhobos, a kind of
dark mirror held up to the party, saying "take care or you'll end up like
them".

Mechanically they're all set up to work like a typical adventuring party. Each
member models a specific PC class or role, and their teamwork will take up a
very smilar form. Any fight against the actual PCs is going to happen in the
Gray Downs, an area full of obscuring mist and hilly, boulder-strewn
terrain. The Barrowhaunts have been there for centuries and are intimately
familiar with it, and will definitely set up traps and ambushes when attacking
intruders.


[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
