---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Wandering Tower"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I've been wanting to write this entry ever since I started doing the Let's Read
of the first Monster Manual and Monster Vault, more than four years ago.

## The Lore

At the dawn of Nerath, a number of knights went a-questing for the fabled
Sunspire, a tower sacred to Pelor that was said to house a beautiful maiden. The
knight who found it would receive the god's blessings and the maiden's hand in
marriage. One such knight eventually found the tower, and went inside at the
maiden's invitation. He was never seen again.

When the armies of evil encircled Gardmore Abbey, they managed to get a
messenger through the siege, carrying a map to the location of their most
precious artifacts to be delivered to the Emperor of Nerath. The messenger ran
until a thunderstorm forced him to seek shelter. He found an inn he didn't
remember seeing before, whose rotund proprietor promised he'd find all he
desired inside. That night, the messenger laid down on his bed and was never
seen again.

Prince Rande the Lost of Nerath gained his noble title after tracking down and
slaying a foul doppelganger. He found it disguised as a lady of noble bearing
living in a fancy manor house. He slew the creature and took her manor for
himself, moving in with his entire household. Servants and nobles alike began
disappearing one by one, giving rise to rumors that the Prince had usurped an
innocent woman and her ghost was seeking vengenace. Finally, the Prince himself
vanished along with the whole house, leaving an empty plot of land behind and
adding "The Lost" to his titles.

Years after the fall of Nerath a group of dwarven adventures came to the Nentir
Vale seeking the Lost Tower of Fastormel. They found the tower, but their
initial attempts at gaining entry failed. An old dwarven wizard eventually
answered the door, claiming she hadn't heard the visitors knock. She invited
them inside. The party's rogue sensed something was wrong and tried to convince
his friends to stay out, but they didn't listen to him. The last thing the rogue
heard before fleeing were the screams of his companions. When he later returned
there with a well-armed rescue party, the tower was nowhere to be found.

Did you know that mimics never die of old age, and never stop growing?

## The Numbers

Yes, the Wandering Tower is a centuries-old mimic. It's helped along by a group
of mirror mimics who play host in order to lure potential victims inside. It's
also followed by a swarm of blood ravens who feast on any remains it
leaves. These appear in every one of the more detailed vignettes in the book
itself.

### Blood Raven Swarm

This is a Large swarm of Tiny creatures, and a Level 14 Skirmisher with 138
HP. Blood Ravens are Natural Beasts, and their main reason for following the
tower is for access to easy meals. Their **Swarm Attack** aura (1) deals 10
damage to enemies caught inside, and if they start their turn on the space of a
bloodied creature they can take move actions as minor actions.

The swarm's sole attack is **Blood Beaks**, which damages the target and weakens
it for a turn if it's bloodied.

### Mirror Mimic

This is an interesting variant of the Impersonator Mimic from the MM3. It's
weaker and more suitable as a hench-thing for the tower, but it also has
different psychic tricks.

Mirror Mimics are Level 15 Lurkers with 118 HP. They have a ground Speed of 6
and Phasing, meaning they can move through walls. They attack with **Slams**
that do decent damage, and their main mimic power is **Body Duplication**. This
lets them attack the Will of an enemy. On a hit, they take the target's form and
teleport up to 3 squares. They also create 3 duplicates of the target within 3
squares of it. The duplicates can be attacked and have the same defenses as the
mimic, but any damage destroys them. Telling them apart from the original mimic
requires a DC 35 Insight check. The mimic can make all of them move its speed
with a single minor action, and can use **Body Transfer** as a minor action to
discreetly switch places with a duplicate. When it does this, its next attack
deals extra damage.

By a strict reading of the ability, the PCs need no rolls to pinpoint their
duplicated friend - they are only required to distinguish between the original
mimic and one of its illusory duplicates. That's not a problem, however, because
when a duplicate is destroyed, the duplicated PC takes damage as if the mimic
had hit them with an attack!

Body Duplication recharges when the mimic has no active duplicates, so keeping
it active is going to be its main priority. After that, it's going to constantly
switch places with a copy and focus its attacks on the duplicated PC. It's going
to be very annoying to fight unless the PCs can consistently make those Insight
rolls. If the party doesn't have an Insight specialist, this thing is going to
punch above its weight.

### Core of the Tower

The Wandering Tower can replicate any medium-sized building. Once its mimic
servants have lured one or more victims inside, the Tower waits until they are
at rest with their guard down, and then its core will attack them. That's the
part that actually does the eating and digesting, and houses the being's vital
organs.

The core is a Huge Aberrant Magical Beast, smaller than the building it's
mimicking (which will be part of the battle map!). The walls and furnishings of
the building remain part of the mimic and can also attack the PCs. This is
modeled in several different ways in this stat block and the next.

The Core of the Tower is a Level 18 Solo Controller with 716 HP, a ground speed
of 6 with Phasing, Darkvision and Tremorsense 10. It's immune to domination and
has 15 acid resistance. It's **One With the Tower**, meaning it can't move out
of the Tower and is immune to any effects that would transport it
outside. Rounding out its Solo Survival Kit, we have the **Undaunted** trait,
which downgrades any stuns inflicted on it to dazes.

The core fights by extending tendrils from itself and manipulating the
surrounding terrain, which is _also_ itself. Its basic attacks are Reach 3 and
consist of **Slams** that slide the target 3 squares and **Grabs** that do
almost the same amount of damage and have an escape DC of 23. It can also, as a
free action on its turn, target a grabbed PC with the **Maw of Doom**, sliding
it 3 squares to a space adjacent to itself or to a wall and dealing a big chunk
of acid damage. This requires an attack roll against Fortitude, but does not end
the grab.

The most combat-relevant minor action the core can make is use its **Rippling
Architecture** to attack every enemy in a Close Burst 5 and knock them prone on
a hit. It can also create additional doors on the map, which start out jammed
shut (break DC 25), or shapeshift into something suitably large, using the same
rules as an object mimic: can't attack, has 10 resistance to all damage, DC 32
to notice it's a mimic. It will likely start the fight this way, and the door
ability will be used to place any doors the PCs see when they enter.

### Living Wall

This is a hazard that's sure to be present on any fight against the Wandering
Tower, since it represents its non-core natural weapons. The book recommends
choosing 8 contiguous squares of wall on the map and designating them as this
hazard. Pseudopods and acidic maws extend from this wall to attack PCs when it
activates.

The Living Wall is a Level 18 Hazard that has slightly lower defenses than the
mimic's core, and 25 HP per square (200 for those 8 recommended squares). It's
very tough, being immune to necrotic, poison, psychic and ongoing damage, as
well as to all forced movement and conditions. It has Resist 10 acid.

Its attack is Reach 3 and though it deals only light physical damage it has
cruel riders: hit targets are pulled 1 square, restrained, and take 10 ongoing
acid damage (save ends both). It can attack two targets with one action, and
each attack can originate from any of the wall's squares.

A square that takes 25 damage is destroyed and can no longer serve as the origin
point for an attack, though I guess it still blocks perception and movement. If
the core is dazed or first bloodied, the wall is disabled for a turn.

## Final Impressions

I love this! It really stretches the mechanics of the game to give you an
encounter against an actual building who wants to kill you. The most likely
fight against the Wandering Tower will involve every stat block in this entry:
the Core itself, on a building interior map with a number of Living Wall
squares and a mirror mimic servant, with the Blood Ravens ready to attack anyone
who tries to get out. That's a very chaotic Level 20 Encounter for 5 characters,
going into the epic levels if your party is smaller.
