---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Demon, Ultrodemon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This creature first appeared as an "Ultrodaemon" in AD&D, as part of the effort
to give every alignment its own brand of outsider. In 4e, daemons lost an "a"
and became demons. We already saw some of them in the readings of earlier books.

## The Lore

Ultrodemons are somewhat atypical among demons because they're greedy
schemers. They enjoy indiscriminate carnage as much as the next demon, but their
real passion is material wealth. They command armies of mezzodemons and
nycademons, sell their mercenary services for ruinous prices, and loot as much
as they can during these operations.

Ultrodemons and their underlings can be found in a wide variety of places,
either under contract to some other villain, or working independently. They're
very rarely loyal to their employers, though, and will turn on them as soon it
looks more profitable than fulfilling the contract.

## The Numbers

This entry only has a single stat block, for an **Ultrodemon Schemer**. This is
a manipulative villain who will likely only fight the PCs in a battlefield of
its own choosing and backed up by a large number of demon allies.

It's a Medium Elemental Humanoid with the Demon tag, and a Level 22 Controller
(Leader) with 205 HP. It has a ground speed of 7 with Phasing, which allows it
to walk through walls. It also has Blindsight with range 5.

The schemer wields a **longsword** whose attacks deal physical damage and daze
for a turn on a hit. It can also use magic to shoot **Fiery Rays** that deal
fire damage. Its command ability is represented by the **Demonic Authority**
power, which allows each ally adjacent to the schemer to make a melee basic
attack with combat advantage as a free action. This recharges when the demon is
first bloodied.

To complement its sword, combat magic, and command ability, the schemer also has
a few nasty mind tricks it can use as minor actions. The first is **Hypnotic
Gaze** (recharge 4+) immobilizes on a hit, and has an effect that prohibits the
target from attacking the schemer for a turn. "Effects" in 4e parlance are
things that happen even on a miss.

The other trick is **Treacherous Gaze** (recharge 6+), which dominates for a
turn.

As its triggered actions, the schemer has a middling version of Variable
Resistance, which gives Resistance 20 but only works once per encounter. It also
has **Self-Preservation**, which triggers when an enemy bloodies it. It causes
the schemed to teleport and swap places with an ally within 10 squares, and
gives the ally a chance to make a free basic attack against the triggering
enemy.

All of this points to a demon who wants to be close to Team Monster's
skirmishers and assassins, and who will accompany them to try to get around the
party's front line. It things become too hot, it will bring in a soldier or
brute from its own front line to spice things up while it flees to safety.

## Final Impressions

I remain a big fan of folding daemons into demons! Mechanically, ultros work
well as "sneaky leaders", which isn't a combination you see very often.
