---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Banderhobb"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I'm fairly sure Banderhobbs are a new monster. If they appeared before, it was
in a book I don't own.

## The Lore

Banderhobbs stuck in my memory as a notable monster when I first read this book,
and now that I'm here again I can se why. They're D&D's take on the Boogeyman,
the monsters parents use to scare their children. Be good, or a banderhobb will
come to you in your sleep and take you away.

This isn't just a fairy tale, though. Banderhobbs really exist. On moonless
nights, they set forth from their home in the Shadowfell, cross into the world,
and look for victims. Once a banderhobb has chosen a victim, it will chase and
swallow them.

All banderhobbs live in the same sinister tower in the Shadowfell, under the
command of an ancient master the book doesn't describe beyond saying he
exists. Banderhobbs who catch their victims return there to regurgitate them,
intact, in front of their master. No one knows what the inside of the tower is
like, or what happens to the abductees.

## The Numbers

We get three Banderhobb stat blocks here. They're all Shadow Magical Beasts with
darkvision and ground/swim speeds of 6. Their levels place them in the
mid-to-late paragon tier.

### Banderhobb Warder

This Large monster is a Level 16 Soldier with 160 HP. Warders are the ones that
most closely resemble a classic horror movie monster or boogeyman. They have an
uncanny ability to chase their chosen victims, appearing from under beds and
inside closets, always a step ahead.

They strike with a Reach 2 **Lonfinger Claw** or with a **Longfinger Clutch**
that's a little weaker but can target two creatures. Both attacks mark on a hit,
and the mark lasts for a turn. They can also make a a Range 5 **Lightning
Tongue** attack that deals lightning damage and knocks prone on a hit.

Marked enemies are in for a bad time. When they end their move, the warder can
teleport up to 10 squares to appear next to them. If they try to make an attack
that doesn't target the warder, the warder can **Swallow** them! This is an
attack against Fortitude, and the warder can shift 3 squares before making it. A
hit means the victim is removed from the map, as they're now inside the warder.

While in the warder's gullet, they take ongoing 10 damage. They can make melee
and close attacks against the warder, or take other non-attack actions. The
effect lasts until the warder hits 0 HP, or until it spits the victim out as a
free action.

There is no save or test that allows an early escape. The warder must die or
regurgitate for the victim to leave its gullet. I guess the warder could also
opt not to damage the victim if we want something like what happens in the lore
story.

### Banderhobb Filch

Instead of being a big frog thing that swallows people, the filch is a Small
lizard thing that puts people in a sack and drags them away. It's a Level 17
Skirmisher with the Leader keyword and 164 HP.

Filches fight with their claws, using **Quick Claw** basic attacks that allow
them to shift on a hit and weaker **Hook Strikes** that grab the target. Once
per encounter they go on a **Distracting Frenzy**, attacking every enemy in a
Close Burst 1 and allowing an ally within 5 squares to make a free standard
action.

They can attack from further away by hocking **Stinking Gobs** (Ranged 5) at
their enemies, or by teleporting with **Shadow Blink** and making a strong claw
attack at either end of the movement.

I would guess being grabbed by a banderhobb filch means being stuffed into the
sack. It's a normal grab, so you can still fight back and try to escape, but
there's no limit to the number of greabbed creatures. The filch can use **Drag
Away** to move its speed and pull all grabbed creatures along with it.

### Banderhobb Abductor

We're back to the "big frog thing" form factor. Abductors are Level 18 Brutes
with 211 HP. They're all about swallowing victims as quickly as possible.

Their basic attack is a **Bite** and they can fling their **Grasping Tongues**
out to Range 5. A hit does damage and pulls the victim adjacent to the
banderhobb, grabbing it. It can use **Swallow** (recharge 5+) on a grabbed
victim, which works like the Warder power but as a standard action attack
instead of a reaction.

When the abductor is first bloodied, it **Crosses into Shadow**, disappearing
from play for a turn and re-appearing 10 squares away. A bloodied abductor can
use **Gobble**, which is a stronger bite that also grabs the target _and_ allows
an immediate Swallow follow-up, recharging the ability as needed.

## Final Impressions

Bandehobbs are spooky and evocative. The book text really lays the purple prose
on thick for them, but I think that works rather well. They're also a shadow
creature _without_ a death theme. They're neither goth nor undead, which is kind
of a rarity.
