---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Cambion"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
---

I clearly remember Cambions existed in third edition, though I don't know if
they date from earlier than that. They're only statted up in the Monster Manual.

Cambions are the offspring of devils and "depraved or unwitting" mortals. This
wording is interesting because it specifically excludes violent rape. The mortal
in question is either aware and willing, or being seduced by a "beautiful
stranger" who later vanishes in the night. It fits the devil idiom in 4e.

It appears Cambions are usually raised by the mother, either in the World or in
the Nine Hells. In either case they're evil and vicious from childhood, taking
on the worst traits of both parent species. I guess it's technically possible
for there to be a non-evil cambion, but the ones in the book aren't them.

Cambions look like red-skinned humans with wings and horns. The book presents us
with two varieties. They're both Medium Immortal Humanoids (devil). The "devil"
keyword marks them as official devils, and has a few rules attached: devils
breathe and eat, but do not sleep. They are however not immune to sleep effects.

## Cambion Hellsword

This guy is a Level 8 Brute with 106 HP. He has darkvision, resist 10 fire,
speed 6, and a flight speed of 8 (clumsy). The "clumsy" keyword means he takes a
-4 penalty to attacks and defenses while flying, so he only uses the wings to go
from point A to point B. He wears mail and carries a flaming greatsword.

The hellsword's basic attack is, well, the hell-sword which does physical damage
and ongoing fire damage. When he charges he can make a sword attack against
every enemy in range, and gains 5 temporary HP whenever he bloodies an enemy or
reduces them to 0 HP.

The hellsword fights like a bowling ball, charging groups of enemies and then
focusing on whoever is closer to being bloodied or taken out.

## Cambion Hellfire Magus

This gal is Level 18 Artillery, and is all about setting things on fire. She
possesses the same darkvision and speed as the hellsword, but her fire
resistance is 15.

Her basic melee attack is with a quarterstaff, and as usual for artillery
monsters it's useless. Her main at-will attack is the Hellfire Ray, which
targets Reflex, does fire damage, and knocks prone on hit. She can also use
Soulscorch, an area attack that also targets reflex, and does both immediate and
ongoing fire damage. That one recharges on a 5-6.

The hellfire magus also has a passive Soul Mantle power, which gives her +4 to
AC and Reflex against ranged attacks.

Her tactics are simple: keep away and shoot fire. Her traits make it both
desirable and difficult for PCs to close to melee with her.

## Encounters

Predictably, Cambions can be found hanging out with devils or with the sort of
evil being who likes to hang out with devils. The suggested encounters are:

- Level 8, four hellswords and a succubus. One happy family?

- Level 18, 2 hellfire magi, a rakshasa noble, and 2 rockfire dreadnought
  elementals. A rajah and his advisors plus some summoned muscle.

## Final Thoughts

Back in the 3e days it took me the longest time to figure out what made cambions
different from tieflings. Both are descended from devils, right? Apparently the
difference was that cambions were direct offspring, while tieflings were who
knows how many generations removed from their fiendish ancestor. In 4e, of
course, tieflings are humans mutated by a diabolic pact their distant ancestors
made.

If you want to make a custom cambion, their "signature" traits are the devil
keyword, the fire resistance, and the wings with their clumsy flight
speed. Their attack powers seem to show a strong tendency towards fire, but
there's no specific power all cambions have.

Story-wise, I'd say people don't really summon cambions despite them having the
devil keyword. Rather, cambions arrive at a place by themselves and tempt other
people into diabolism.
