---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Troll"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-troll.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

D&D Trolls are inspired by the writings of Poul Anderson and have been in the
game since the beginning. Here, they are present in both the Monster Manual and
the Vault. I'm telling you in advance: I'm not gonna make jokes about rude
Internet posters.

## The Lore

Trolls are large humanoid creatures with amazing regenerative powers, able to
survive just about anything and thrive just about anywhere. This same remarkable
metabolism makes it so trolls are always hungry and in search of food. They'll
eat anything that's smaller than themselves and made of meat.

The only things that can temporarily overwhelm a troll's regeneration are fire
and acid. One of these is required to kill a troll permanently - it can come
back from anything else. This makes them pretty much fearless in combat. Trolls
attack even when they're outnumbered and when the enemies seem strong, because
they're confident in their survival. Even the presence of fire and acid doesn't
get them to back off right away, though in this case they might retreat if they
get too hurt.

I imagine this made trolls into dangerous puzzle monsters back when they were
new, but now pretty much any D&D veteran is going to know about their
weaknesses. If you have no other source of fire you can "kill" the troll with
conventional weapons and stick a lit torch in it to finish the job, but even
that is easier said than done. And adventurers these days tend to prefer those
alchemical glow-sticks as light sources, so they might not even have torches
available if they don't know a troll is around!

Trolls are sapient, but not very smart. Still smarter than ogres,
though. Tricking the typical troll is easy, provided you can get it to talk to
you instead of immediately ripping you apart and eating the pieces. All sorts of
villains and tyrants like to recruit trolls into their forces, since they'll
readily work for a bit of money and a lot of food. Such trolls are all too glad
to receive additional training and gear from their bosses, and though they make
for undisciplined and rowdy soldiers, they're deadly in a fight.

Evil wizards also love trolls, for a different reason. They can survive all
sorts of disturbing magical experiments, which tend to result in weird mutants
much stronger and much less mentally stable than a standard troll.

It's perfectly possible for there to be trolls who aren't evil and who don't eat
other sapients, though even them they'd have a hard time coexisting with those
sapients since they require large hunting areas to sustain themselves. Even nice
trolls are likely to make their home in the wilderness far away from any
settlements.

## The Numbers

Trolls are Large Natural Humanoids, and their signature traits are
**Regeneration** and **Troll Healing**.

As I explained in a previous entry, 4e Regeneration is more or less equivalent
to 3e's Fast Healing: the monster recovers the specified amount of hit points at
the start of its turn as long as it has at least 1 HP remaining. For MM trolls,
this is either 10 or 15 depending on the stat block. For MV trolls, this is 5
across the board. Troll regeneration stops working for a turn if the monster
takes fire or acid damage.

Troll Healing is what makes them immortal: if a troll is reduced to 0 HP by
anything other than fire or acid damage, it recovers the specified amount of HP
and rises again at the start of its next turn. It can still be killed before it
rises if it takes fire or acid damage while down.

In addition to these, they can usually do something interesting when their basic
attack bloodies a target. Being Large creatures, all their attacks have
Reach 2. They only speak Giant, which is another barrier to nonviolent
communication.

### Troll (Both)

The basic model is a Level 9 Brute with 100 HP. The MV version has regeneration
10 and troll healing 10, while the MV version has regeneration 5 and troll
healing 15. Both have speed 8.

Trolls attack with their **claws**, and if their basic attack bloodies the
target they get to make another one against it as a free action. They have no
other special abilities, being quintessential brutes.

### Battle Troll (Monster Vault)

A troll who received extra training and equipment from its patrons. It's a Level
12 Soldier with 124 HP. Its speed is reduced to 7 by armor, and its
regeneration/troll healing values are 5/15.

The battle troll wears scale and fights with a **broadsword**, which marks the
target for a turn. If a broadsword attack bloodies the target, the troll can
make another free attack against it. It can also use the sword to make
**sweeping strikes** which hit in a Close Blast 2 and knock targets prone.

### Bladerager Troll (Monster Vault)

The product of twisted Cocaine Wizard experiments, this is a troll who had tons
of sharp blades implanted all over its body. It's a Level 12 Brute with 151 HP,
Speed 7, and Regeneration 5 _without_ Troll Healing.

The bladerager attacks with its augmented **claws**, which can also perform a
**Bladerager Rend** once per encounter for massive immediate damage and ongoing
10 damage (save ends). A miss does half the immediate and ongoing damage. If the
basic claw attack bloodies a target, the Rend recharges.

When the bladerager reaches 0 HP, it explodes into a cloud of shrapnel! This
**Death Burst** targets affects a Close Burst 2 around the troll, doing a bit
less damage than the rend to everyone caught by it.

### Ghost Troll Render (Monster Vault)

This troll died but didn't even notice. It'll still try to eat you. You can make
any regular troll into an elite of sorts by having one of these rise up from its
corpse.

Ghost Trolls are Level 13 Brutes with 161 HP and the Undead keyword. They have a
flight speed of 7 with Hover and Phasing, and are immune to disease and
poison. Lacking a body, they no longer regenerate and are instead
Insubstantial. This means they take half damage from anything but force
attacks. Getting hit by a radiant, fire or acid attack makes them substantial
for a turn.

Their basic attack is a **Spirit Claw** that targets Reflex, and they can
perform a **Terror Strike** (melee 2 vs. Will) that does a massive amount of
psychic damage and slows on a hit (save ends). The first failed save turns that
slowed status into unconsciousness, which ends on a sucessful save or if the
victim takes damage. This is an encounter power that recharges if it misses, so
chances are the ghost _will_ scare someone this way during the fight.

### War Troll (Monster Manual)

An earlier but slightly more flexible version of the MV Battle Troll. This one
is a Level 14 Soldier with 110 HP. It wears plate, wields a greatsword, but also
carries a longbow and a quiver full of arrows. Its speed is 7 and its
regeneration/troll healing values are 10/15.

It has the same **greatsword** and **sweeping strike** attacks of the Battle
Troll, and it also has **Threatening Reach** (2) and can use **Blood Pursuit**
as a reaction to shift 1 square closer to a bloodied enemy within 2 squares who
shifts. It can also fight at range with its **Longbow**, of course.

### Fell Troll (Monster Manual)

The biggest and baddest among trolls. They're Huge, and Level 20 Elite Brutes
with 360 HP. Their speed is 10, their regeneration/troll healing values are
10/20, and they gain a +1 to attacks and a +2 to damage against bloodied
enemies.

Their basic attack is a Reach 3 **claw**, and they can use Reach 3 **backhand
slams** as a 1/round minor action for extra damage and to push fools up to 4
squares.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

I don't think it's possible for a game to call itself D&D without including
green regenerating trolls in its bestiary. Non-D&D games can still have them, of
course: GURPS Dungeon Fantasy does.

The Monster Manual has three sample encounters:

- Level 9: 3 trolls and 2 destrachans. The destrachans are slightly smarter than
  the trolls.

- Level 16: 2 war trolls, 1 night hag, 5 grimlock minions, a drow priest, and a
  drow blademaster. A group so diverse it could be an evil adventuring party.

- Level 19: 1 fell troll, 2 enormous carrion crawlers.

War and battle trolls can be found alongside anyone who is willing to pay
them. The others would be found with more trolls, and with creatures they might
have decided to keep as pets. Mechanically, they need that company to make for
more interesting fights, because their abilities aren't very varied on their
own.

Adding some trolls to a "wilderness" region you're populating might work as a
fine explanation for why all those other deadly monsters don't spill out and
overwhelm nearby "points of light". If anyone would hunt and eat bullettes, dire
boars, roaming gricks and maybe even the occasional drow scouting party, it's a
bunch of trolls.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
