---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Mind Flayer"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Mind flayers made their 4e debut back in the first Monster Manual. This entry
adds more lore to them, and more stat blocks.

## The Lore

Mind flayers maintain one of the most evil civilizations in the Underdark, and
that's saying something. Illithids are aggressive supremacists who prefer to
engage with even drow and duergar through slave-taking raids rather than
anything resembling diplomacy. Their settlements consist of a large population
of permanently mind-controlled thralls from every other sapient species in the
Underdark, supporting a small collective of illithid masters, who in turn might
be led by an Elder Brain.

Elder Brains live in special life support vats, and despite being stationary are
psionic powerhouses. Third Edition had Elder Brains as deceivers who absorbed
the knowledge and power of deceased illithids. Fifth Edition would make mind
flayers into a full-on hive mind centered on the brains. Here in Fourth they're
neither of those things. Instead, they are revered leaders and masterminds. They
form the center of a telepathic network linking all the illithids in the
collective, who can communicate and share information instantly through it.

When an illithid collective passes a certain threshold of size and combined
power, it performs a specific procedure on its wisest and most respected
member. The volunteer's head is severed and placed in the support tank, where it
is kept alive. The other mind flayers then focus their psionic energy on the
head over an extended period of time, causing it to grow in size and power until
it becomes an Elder Brain.

As mentioned before, mind flayers don't really "do" diplomacy. Their
non-illithid allies are almost all slaves and mind-controlled thralls. They
usually come from some of the other sapient people of the Underdark, though a
mind flayer with access to the surface will happily enthrall surfacers as
well. Occasionally you'll find other aberrant monsters working alongside them,
either as thralls or as allies of convenience in a symbiotic relationship.

Lone illithids might end up making actual alliances with other villains, though
they only cooperate on their own terms even then.

## The Numbers

As before, mind flayers are Medium Aberrant Humanoids with Darkvision and
Speed 7. All of them have psychic powers and something that lets them mess with
other people's brains, but the specifics vary per stat block. The entries in the
MM1 and Monster Vault focus on the mid Paragon tier. These show stronger
individuals in the early Epic tier.

### Mind Flayer Inquisitor

As the name implies, inquisitors are strong telepaths. The flavor text describes
one of them hiding in abandoned tunnels and kidnapping nobles and sages to feast
on their brains and memories.

Inquisitors are Level 20 Controllers with 190 HP. Their basic melee attack are
the classic grabby **tentacles**, which target Reflex. A hit damages and grabs
the victim (Athletics DC 31 or Acrobatics DC 33 to escape). Once the inquisitor
has grabbed a victim, it can use **Implant Delusions** on them. This targets
Will, does psychic damage, and inflicts the custom "delusions" condition (save
ends). Victims suffering from delusions inflict a -2 penalty to all attacks and
defenses of adjacent allies.

Their ranged powers start with the classic **mind blast** (recharge 5+) that
inflicts psychic damage and dazes (save ends). A miss does half damage. Their
**Own Worst Enemy** ability is an Area Burst 2 with a range of 10 squares. It
hits _automatically_ and forces every enemy in the area to use an at-will power
of the inquisitor's choice against themselves! Thankfully it's an encounter
power that recharges when the inquisitor is first bloodied, but it's still rough
on those Essentials martials.

As a minor action, the inquisitor can force an **Unwilling Confession** from an
enemy within 10 squares. This is an attack against Will, and though it does no
damage it prevents the victim from being affected by healing and by powers that
grant saves (save ends).

And finally, when the inquisitor sees an enemy succeed at a saving throw, they
can use **Forceful Submission** to force them to re-roll that save with a -2
penalty.

Inquisitors work well with a solid frontline of brutes or soldiers who can keep
them safe and isolate possible victims for melee attacks. They also pair well
with other monsters loaded with save-ends powers.

### Mind Flayer Scourge

The flavor text here tells the story of how early surface psionics honed their
abilities by raiding mind flayer lairs and trying to steal their secrets. The
discipline of the mind flayer scourge was developed in response to these
raids.

Scourges are Level 21 Skirmishers with 199 HP. They have Resist 10 Psychic,
which does help a lot against most psionic PCs.

They have the usual grabby **tentacles** and dazing **mind blast** (recharge
5+). Their tentacles also daze the grabbed victim while the grab lasts, and
the **Mind Leech** passive trait allows them to make an extra saving throw or
recharge roll while grabbing a victim. They can even recharge their **Psychic
Assault** encounter power with a roll of 6+.

Psychic Assault targets the grabbed victim's Will. On a hit it deals a bit of
psychic damage and dominates the victim (save ends, but with a -4 penalty). On a
miss, it deals half damage and _still_ dominates the victim (save ends). As
mentioned above this is an encounter power but the scourge can recharge it with
Mind Leech. It's extremely bad news for the PCs. Scourges prefer to use it on
spellcasters or psionics.

If surrounded, they can use **Alter Reality** as a minor action to teleport an
adjacent enemy 2 squares, allowing them to potentially disengage from a defender
without triggering any reactions.

### Thoon Hulk

Mind flayers aren't a very religious lot, but there is at least one entity they
speak of with the reverence others would reserve for a god. Its name is Thoon,
and that's pretty much all non-illithids know about the subject. Whatever
relationship Thoon might have with these brutish monstrosities remains a
mystery, but they do show us that mind flayers have no problem performing
horrific experiments on their own.

Thoon Hulks are much stronger and less intelligent than a typical mind flayer,
but they still retain their psionic powers. They're found as servants to
"baseline" mind flayers and to other powerful aberrants like aboleths. They're
Level 22 Brutes with 255 HP.

The hulk's basic attack is named **Eviscerate**, and uses its giant axe
hands. This deals extra damage against creatures grabbed by the hulk. It can
still grab using **tentacles**, which do no damage but are a minor action. This
means it can grab and eviscerate on the same turn. Its **mind blast** is the
usual psychic damage + daze combo, but it happens a little less often (recharge
6+). Once per encounter it can focus its powers and issue the **Call of Thoon**
(ranged 10 vs. Will), which does heavy psychic damage and pulls the target up to
10 squares so it ends up adjacent to the hulk.

When the hulk dies, it triggers a **Psychic Explosion**, which covers a Close
Burst 2 and inflicts ongoing 15 psychic damage (save ends).

Hulks are excellent front-liners, and the Call of Thoon also allows them to pull
a PC squishy into Eviscerate range.

### Elder Brain

As mentioned above, Elder Brains are the big bosses of a medium-to-large
illithid enclave. They rule with absolute authority and live in ooze vats that
amplify their powers and allow them to communicate with their subjects over vast
distances.

Getting to an elder brain's vat is an adventure in itself, since it will
inevitably be in the most secure and heavily guarded part of a sizable illithid
enclave. Once there, the PCs will have to contend with the brain itself and with
whatever bodyguards are in the chamber with it. Elder Brains are usually too
arrogant to run away from a fight, though they may change their tunes after
their bodyguards are taken down and they're reduced to low HP. However, getting
there is harder than it looks, because not only can the brain fight, it can also
_move_.

Elder Brains are Large Aberrant Magical Beasts with the Blind keyword. They have
Blindsight 10 and are immune to the blinded condition and to gaze attacks. They
have a ground speed of 2 and a teleport speed of 6, which I think is a first in
the game - earlier edition brains were pretty much confined to their vats.

Brains are Level 23 Elite Controllers with 436 HP. They start off with a host of
passive traits. The first, **Warp Reality** is an aura (5) that deals 10 damage
to any enemy that teleports while inside. The second, **Absorb Thoughts**,
grants the brain a saving throw or recharge roll whenever a non-minion ally
drops to 0 HP within 10 squares. And the third, **Unseeing Telepathy**, allows
it to communicate telepathically even when it doesn't have line of effect to the
other creature.

Warp Reality's effect doesn't care whether it was the enemy who initiated the
teleport, or if someone else teleported the enemy. Damage happens either
way. This is important because most of the elder brain's attacks teleport the
target.

The basic melee attack is a Reach 3 **Tentacle Warp**, which does light physical
damage, teleports the target 3 squares, and immobilizes them for a
turn. **Flailing Warp** allows them to make three such attacks in a single
action, each against a different target. Instead of a mind blast, they have a
**mind burst** (recharge 5+), which targets all enemies in a Close Burst 5 with
the usual effects.

They can also use **Sensory Overload** as a minor action, which works almost
identically to the mind burst. It does a little less damage, and instead of
dazing it blinds and deafens for a turn _and_ teleports the target 3 squares.

Finally, every time the elder brain successfully saves against an effect,
**Baleful Transfer** automatically afflicts an enemy within 5 squares with the
effect the brain just saved against.

These stats seem to reward aggressive tactics. All of the brain's attacks have a
range that's equal or less than that of its aura, so it wants to fight from
close range. It will probably try to teleport to be near the PC's squishier back
line, using Tentacle Warps to keep them close and to keep defenders away. It
also has enough melee reach to fight from behind a wall of soldiers or brutes,
and pairs well with other enemies that inflict forced teleports.
