---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Devil, Passion"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This is the first time I come across passion devils, but they give me strong 3e
vibes.

## The Lore

Do you want to employ seductive and manipulative devils in your villainous
schemes, but feel that succubi are too nice? Fierna, archdevil ruler of
Phlegethos, sure did! In order to fulfill her very specific needs, she created
Passion Devils.

The reason these creatures give me a strong 3e-or-earlier vibe is that they feel
like the sort of grid-filling exercise that was very common in those
games. Succubi were considered demons back then, so when they needed to fill the
"seductive manipulator" niche on the devil side they created a completely new
creature.

In 4e, passion devils are kinda like a specialized succubus variant tied to
Fierna. As incarnations of her vanity, they're made in her image but always have
some extra imperfection in their forms so their mistress remains the fairest of
them all. They're sent to infiltrate mortal societies just like a succubus, and
they're also used to replace the leadership of Fierna's own cults so she can
keep tabs on them. When used as official emissaries and ambassadors, they are
often protected by a unit of bearded devil bodyguards.

The main difference between a baseline succubus and a passion devil is that the
latter have serious anger management issues. When their tempers flare, their
disguises tend to melt away as the passion devil abandons all subtlety and
resorts to force. This is obviously what happens when the PCs thwart their
plans, but it could also happen if they run out of patience while trying to
employ standard succubus strategies. At least their fire powers make them better
combatants than succubi when the jig is up.

## The Numbers

These creatures are Medium Immortal Humanoids with the Devil keyword, and Level
16 Controllers. They have Darkvision, Resist Fire 20, and move at speed 6 on the
ground or in the air. A pretty standard devil toolkit.

They project a charm aura (1) that makes others see them as a **Object of
Desire** and take a -2 penalty to saves against dazing effects.

Their basic attack is a **claw** that targets Reflex and does fire damage. They
can also be "gentler" and employ a **Fiery Touch** that does less damage and
dominates for a turn. The ability that combos with their aura is **Beckoning
Whispers**, a non-damaging attack against Will that pulls targets 5 squares and
dazes them (save ends).

Finally they have an area attack named **Passion's Flames**, a Close Burst 3
that deals fire damage and forces any dominated enemies it hits to make melee
basic attacks against targets of the devil's choice.

As a minor action, the passion devil can **change shape** to appear like a
Medium humanoid. The DC to see through the disguise is a respectable 36, but
it's less stable than that of a succubus and ends when the devil attacks.

## Final Impressions

It's a Succubus Plus with a temper. Lore-wise they're Fierna's trademark
servants, so they fit into any adventure where she's the main enemy. Otherwise
you might want to use leveled-up succubi from the Monster Vault, or reskin these
into succubi as appropriate.
