---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Howler"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Howlers totally feel like a 3e monster, probably because of the art. I suppose
they might have shown up in AD&D too, it's not like the game was ever shy about
adding one more dog monster to the pile.

## The Lore

Howlers are spiky, sapient quadrupedal predators that feed on fear. They've
evolved to hunt in a way that's as terrifying as possible. Younger howlers are
quick to kill because they enjoy the spike of fear the victim feels when it
dies, but older specimens are sophisticated enough to hold whole villages
hostage with the _threat_ of death-by-howler and feed off the ambient terror.

The most legendary howler of all is known as Terror Incarnate. This creature
managed to devour the fear felt by an entire army as it died, and this excess
power turned it into something like a demigod of terror. Its eventual progeny
inherited its powers.

There's some fuzzy edges in their lore. It mentions howlers attacking people in
the middle world and in the Underdark, mentions associations with shadar-kai,
but gives the creature an Elemental origin. I think they might fit better as
either Natural or Shadow. Fortunately origin doesn't influence
stats. Alternatively you might go the other way and make them a type of demon.

## The Numbers

As mentioned above, Howlers are Elemental Magical Beasts. They have Darkvision
and a Speed of 8. They understand Abyssal but can't speak.

### Howler Dread Hound

One of those young specimens that kills too quickly. They gather in huge packs
to massacre whole villages at once. They are Medium Level 9 Minion Controllers
with a speed of 8. At Int 5, they're sapient but dim.

As with all "dog monsters", their basic attack is a **bite**. This one does a
bit of damage and slides the target 1 square on a hit. They also have a
**Piercing Spines** trait that deals the same damage as the bite to anyone who
misses them with a melee attack. The ability that gives them their name is the
**Dread Howl** encounter power, a fear attack that catches every enemy in a
Close Blast 5 and targets Will. A hit does a bit of psychic damage and makes the
target grant combat advantage for a turn.

These are minions, so there will always be a lot of them when they appear. A bit
of orchestration could ensure PCs grant combat advantage for most of the fight.

### Howler Doom Mastiff

An older, fully developed howler who has learned the value of prolonged
psychological torture. They roam ruins and tunnels in small packs, looking for
victims to terrify. They are Large Level 13 Skirmishers with 129 HP and a speed
of 8.

Doom Mastiffs are large enough to ride, and they have the Mount keyword. As they
have Int 9, I think this is more of an equal partnership thing than the rider
"keeping" the howler as a mount or pet. The **Guarding Spines** trait gives the
mastiff's rider a +2 bonus to AC. Its **Piercing Spines** does 10 damage to
anyone who misses the howler _or its rider_ with a melee attack.

Their basic **Bites** are a little weak but can be used as part of a **Loping
Bite** attack that allows the mastiff to shift half its speed and bite. Their
**Terrifying Howl** is a lot stronger than the dread hound's: it deals 10
ongoing psychic damage to those it hits, and makes them grant combat advantage
(save ends). Targets adjacent to the mastiff _can't save agains this_. Finally,
this is a (recharge 6+) power instead of an encounter power. So it might happen
more than once!

Being all about that delicious fear, the mastiff will open with a howl and then
will do its best to stick to one of the affected PCs, using move actions and
Loping Bites to do so. It's smart enough to prefer a squishy victim over a
defender, too.

### Howler Terror Incarnate

The one that devoured an army's collective fear and became a demigod of
terror. It's a Large Level 22 Lurker with 155 HP.

The terror's **Shadow Spines** work a lot like that of its lesser relatives, but
deal necrotic damage. It also has a **Terror Incarnate** aura (3) that deals 10
psychic damage per turn to any enemies inside.

Their basic **bite** deals the same damage as that of the level 13 doom mastiff,
which I'm almost sure is a typo. It can also possess people with the **Shadow of
Terror** power. This is a melee attack that can only be used against people who
can't see the howler, and who haven't been possessed during the fight yet. On a
hit, the howler is removed from play and the target is dominated (save
ends). The target's at-will attacks deal an extra 1d8 psychic damage and target
Will instead of their original defenses. The posession ends when the target
passes a save or takes radiant damage - when this happens, the howler reappears
adjacen to them. The target is then dazed (save ends).

Their final attack is the **Death Howl**, another blast attack. This one does
immediate psychic damage and dazes (save ends) on a hit.

**Shadow Lope** (recharge 4+) provides the ability to set up for a Shadow of
Terror attack: it allows the howler to become invisible for a turn and move its
speed.

## Final Impression

Howlers are far from the first dog monsters to show up in D&D. They're not even
the first dog monsters with fear powers. Still, you can use them in your
campaign in place of wargs and other similarly-leveled canine menaces for added
variety. The Doom Mastiff's ability to act as a mount also makes it an possible
replacement for a Nightmare. Anyone who would ride an Evil Fire Horse would also
certainly ride an Evil Fear Dog.
