---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Ragewind"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Ragewinds first appeared in Third Edition, and make their Fourth Edition debut
here. They're mostly generic, with some added hooks for the Vale.

## The Lore

Also known as sword spirits, ragewinds are undead monsters that can form in
battlefields. They're made up of the spirits of despondent soldiers who believe
they died for nothing. These shades are individually weak, but they have the
ability to move the weapons they wielded in life. A ragewind arises when many of
these indignant ghosts join to form a single composite entity.

Ragewinds can lie dormant to appear as a random pile of old weapons. When
active, they assume the whirlwind form you can see in the illustration. They can
understand Common and modulate their wind to speak it, but they're true monsters
and are only interested in killing living people who stray too close to
them. When destroyed, they release the pent-up anger and hatred inside them,
which might cause their enemies to turn against each other. These creatures
carry no treasure save the weapons that make up their form. They might also be
hanging around something worth digging up, acting as accidental guardians.

The Nentir Vale region doesn't just contain the ruins of a number of old
civilizations - it was also the site of many of their battles. Bloodspear Orcs
against Nerathi, Nerathi against the Hill Folk or the dragons of the Dawnforges,
Arkhosia against Bael Turath, elves vs. drow, and perhaps others that have been
lost to time. Any of these places might house a number of very old ragewinds.

## The Numbers

A ragewind is a Large Natural Animate with the Undead tag, and a Level 18
Skirmisher with 112 HP. It has an amazing ground speed of 10 and a flight speed
of 5, and perceives the world through Blindsight 20.

As a literal weapon whirlwinds, a ragewind projects a **Slashing Aura** (1) that
inflicts 10 damage on enemies caught inside, or 15 when it's bloodied. Its
**All-Around Defense** means it doesn't provoke opportunity attacks when moving,
and it's under a permanent **Freedom of Movement** effect that ends any slowing
or immobilizing effects on the creature at the start of its turn.

Its basic attack is named **Weapon Fury**, which does physical damage and also
gives the ragewind 10 temporary HP if it's bloodied. It can also use a **Rush of
Blades** maneuver to shift 5 squares and use Weapon Fury at any point during the
movement.

By expanding itself a bit the ragewind can make a **Steel Whirlwind** attack
(recharge 5+), which attacks a Close Burst 1 and does more damage than a basic
attack, half on a miss. If the creature is bloodied the area is a Close Burst 2
instead.

When it dies, the ragewind triggers its **Death's Rage** ability, which attacks
the Will of every enemy in a Close Burst 5 and, if it hits, forces the target to
make a basic attack against its nearest ally.


## Final Impression

These are dangerous physical combatants who are hard to pin down and can really
punish PC groups who like close formations.

If the location of any of the Vale's ragewinds was known, they'd probably be the
stuff of legends told all over. It's quite likely that they're unknown because
no one who met one has lived to tell the tale. With a speed of 10, they're
almost impossible to outrun even on horseback.

A lot of the NPC factions we saw so far have a relatively high chance of running
into these things, because they spend their time digging up old ruins and
battlefields: Dythan's Legion, the Gray Company, the Hunter Spiders. Y'know, our
usual suspects. I imagine this would happen as the climax of their story arcs,
as they're just about to find what they're looking for.
