---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Demon, Maw"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

There isn't much to a maw demon. It's a huge fanged mouth with enough extra bits
attached to take it to wherever the food is. While most other demons are
motivated by rage, hatred, or ruinous ambition, these things just want to
eat. They're a bit like sharks, drawn to the smell of blood, and will prioritize
an easy meal over a fight.

Maw demons are still demons, so they prefer their meals bloody and still
twitching. If there are none like that, they'll advance on the nearest living
creature.

The typical maw demon is rather weak as far as demons go, though it still
presents a big threat to non-combatants. Those who manage to live longer become
much stronger and hungrier.

Maw demons are sapient, but just barely. They don't really form alliances, but
stronger demons can bully them into servitude, and even amateur demonologists
might be able to summon and bind one.

## Maw Demon

This is a Medium Elemental Humanoid with the Demon tag. It's a Level 2 Brute
with 42 HP, darkvision, and a speed of 6.

The demon's **snapping jaws** act like an aura (1) that make all enemies inside
grant combat advantage. Its basic attack is obviously a **bite**. It can use a
move action to perform a **Ravenous Advance** and shift 5 squares to end
adjacent to a bloodied enemy.

Finally, as a demon, it has **Variable Resistance** and can switch it once per
encounter.

## Greater Maw Demon

This is mostly just a leveled-up maw demon. It's a Level 16 Brute with 187 HP
and correspondingly bigger numbers. Its variable resistance works twice per
encounter, and  it has a new hability: **Howling Hunger** targets Will, hits a
Close Burst 3, does thunder damage, and knocks targets prone. It can only be
used when the demon is bloodied.

## Final Impressions

Just another demonic brute. Its low level makes it an interesting variation on
the MM2 dretches, with better math. Their most interesting power is actually the
Snapping Jaws aura, which makes them pair really well with ranged monsters that
benefit from combat advantage.

During the MM2 reading on the RPG.net forum, someone mentioned that these things
could be abyssal xorns, and it fits really well with their mechanics.
