---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Before I close the curtain on this Let's Read, there's one more thing to
discuss. It's not something a lot of people remember today, but I thought it was
kind of a big deal in the early days of 4e when the Manual had just been
published.

We've been talking about the animal appendix on the Monster Vault, but the
Monster Manual also has an appendix. This one is filled with stats for using
several of the book's entries as playable characters!

Some of them are for characters from that were traditionally considered "monster
races", others are for races that would get full writeups later in the edition
but the authors felt they were popular enough to deserve preliminary stats. The
full list is:

- Bugbear
- Doppelganger
- Drow
- Githyanki
- Githzerai
- Gnoll
- Gnome
- Goblin
- Hobgoblin
- Kobold
- Minotaur
- Orc
- Shadar-kai
- Shifter (Longtooth and Razorclaw)
- Warforged

Each one has more or less the same information as a basic racial stat block from
the PHB: Average height and weight, ability score bonuses, size speed, vision
modes, starting languages, skill bonuses and a racial power.

I had actually forgotten this appendix was here despite being very enthusiastic
about it when it had just come out. The reason for this is that it slowly became
less relevant as more 4e material was published.

Even at the start the appendix races were already a little bit behind
mechanically, since the ones from the PHB had a handful of extra racial feats
each and these didn't. The gap widened as further player option books came out
with yet more feats and stuff like racial paragon paths. Several of the appendix
races would have more complete versions published in future books, which
rendered their initial versions obsolete:

- Doppelgangers, Shifters and Warforged would appear in the Eberron Player's
  Guide.

- Gnomes would appear in the PHB2. Half-Orcs too, which you could just reskin
  into full orcs.

- Githzerai and Minotaurs would appear in the PHB 3.

- Githyanki would appear in the Dark Sun Player's Guide.

- Drow would appear in Heroes of the Forgotten Kingdoms.

That's almost all of them, isn't it? Kobolds, gnolls and goblinoids might have
gotten Dragon articles (I know gnolls did) but they got less support overall. At
some point in the edition the ability score bonuses also went from "+2 to these
two fixed scores" to "+2 to one fixed score and +2 to one of these other two
scores", and some of the races here never did get that third option.

And this slightly maudlin post finally finishes our Let's Read of the first
Monster Manual! I hope you enjoyed it. I plan on doing the other two and the
other Vault, and hopefully I'll take less time to post those in their entirety.
