---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Abolethic Sovereignity"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
    - neverwinter
---

As mentioned before, one of the things the Spellplague did a century ago was to
bring parts of the world of Abeir into Toril, and vice-versa. These transplanted
chunks of geography also brought whoever happened to be living on them. And one
of these whoevers was the Abolethic Sovereignity, a kingdom ruled by these
aberrant creatures.

Shortly after arriving, the Sovereignity built a flying citadel named Xxiphu to
act as their headquarters. Interested in studying the phenomenon that isekaied
them, the aboleths started searching for pockets of the chaotic magic that makes
up the Spellplague and sending in research teams to investigate them.

One of the pockets they found was in the Underdark beneath Neverwinter. A branch
of the Sovereignity built a permanent base around it and have been studying it
for the past few decades, occasionally kidnapping people from the surface to
serve as test subjects.

When the eruption happened, it opened a chasm on the surface that went all the
way down to the aboleth base, potentially exposing it to curious delvers from
the surface. Moving the base was not an option, so they instead fortified it and
began sending the results of their early experiments up the chasm as a way to
discourage explorers. This worked for a long time, since the city was a mess.

When Neverember arrived and began rebuilding, the aboleths felt threatened and
began taking more active steps to divert the lord's attention elsewhere and to
infiltrate his organization.

## Goals

After a century of research the aboleths have a pretty good handle on the
properties of the Spellplague, and they have a planned use for it.

You see, they know where Maegera is. Their entry in the book off-handedly
remarks that it was a brief awakening of the primordial that caused that
city-destroying eruption. The AbSov's ultimate plan is to expose the primordial
to the Spellplague, using the techniques they developed to then dominate her
mind or control her in some other fashion. With a genuine primordial under their
command, the Sovereignity has a real shot at taking over the whole world.

In the meantime, they're using that expertise on a steady stream of victims
brought from the surface by their agents. These unfortunates are exposed to the
Spellplague in a controlled manner. Those who fail to display the proper
strength of mind and soul after initial exposure to the Plague become the
monsters regularly released upon the surface. Those who pass this test are then
subject to a very specific series of tortures and procedures that turn them into
near-mindless members of the Choir that sings the Symphony of Madness.

This Symphony has been broadcasting nightmares all over the region, which
afflict its more psychically sensitive individuals. The stronger it gets the
more people are affected. This might be the tool that will be used to tame
Maegera, or it could be a more general-purpose terror weapon, depending on the
GM's designs.

## Player Tie-Ins

The nightmares mentioned in the descriptions of Oghma's Faithful and the
Spellscarred Harbinger come from the Symphony of Madness. The latter in
particular has very strong thematic ties to the AbSov - their starting hook
sends the PC right into their clutches, as we'll see soon.

If the GM decides to make the AbSov a major antagonist in the campaign, then the
Symphony's nightmares will likely begin affecting more and more people. Its
effects are not set in stone, but the book gives various suggestions:

- They might make victims irritable and violent.

- They might drain healing surges after a long rest.

- They might impost long-lasting penalties from lack of sleep or psychological
  trauma.

- They might provide hints about where to find their source.

Stepping up the frequency or severity of these effects over the course of the
campaign will provide a very strong incentive for PCs to find the source of
these dreams and shut it down, leading to a big confrontation against the AbSov
in their home base.

## Relationships

We already know the AbSov is busily infiltrating New Neverwinter. Here we also
learn that they sort of disdain the Ashmadai, because all of the cult's attempts
to infiltrate them have only fed them more converts (including Rohini). They are
however more circumspect when dealing with the Thayans or the Netherese, because
they fear the powerful magic those factions might be able to bring to bear if
they call on their far-away epic bosses.

## Impressions

This is a comparatively huge entry, which leads me to think the Aboleths are
usually intended to be one of the campaign's top antagonists. A campaign where
you start opposing (or even working for) New Neverwinter and uncover the aboleth
conspiracy seems to be an easy one to make with the book's setup.


[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/2019/12/15/succubus.html
[2]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/2020/01/16/green-dragon.html
