---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Wolf Runners"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The last entry in the book.

## The Lore

Looks like the Raven Roost bandits have some competition! The Wolf Runners are
another of the bandit gangs who prey on the Trade Road between Fallcrest and
Hammerfast. They have this name because their leader, Sylish Kreed, has somehow
gained the loyalty of a pack of grey and dire wolves, and has them aid the gang
when they attack caravans.

Kreed presents himself as the dashing rogue type, and tries to be civil and
good-humored when dealing with his victims. The gang vastly prefers to take its
victims' valuables without a fight, and to leave them alive and free to go. This
both lessens the heat upon them and gives them the opportunity to rob the same
people again in the future.

The counter-balance to this, however, is that Kreed is a terribly sore loser. If
he ends up on the losing end of a battle, he'll become sullen and obsessed with
taking revenge on whoever beat him. He doesn't necessarily want to kill the
offender, but he won't rest until he's re-established his superiority.

This sort of alpha-asshole behavior and the wolves might have tipped you off to
the gang's big secret: Kreed is a werewolf, having caught lycanthropy from a
bite a few years back. He can transform at will most of the time, but for three
days on every full moon he loses control, changes into a wolf, and goes off to
live with his pack until his rational mind returns. Kreed's condition is not
public knowledge, though I guess his gang-mates know of it.

His main lieutenant certainly does: that's Eveni Redblade, a tiefling whom he
rescued from the Dark Drake of the Moon Hills some time ago, and who as a result
is completely loyal to him. Speaking of loyalty, the wolves are also loyal to
Kreed personally, though they tolerate the gang and vice-versa.

Wolf Runner ambushes tend to consist of a troop of archers hidden in the woods
off to both sides of the road, while Kreed and his wolf pack block the path and
do any melee fighting that proves necessary.

## The Numbers

Other than the unusual nature of their leader and his "understanding" with those
wolves, the Wolf Runners are a typical bandit gang that uses typical bandit stat
blocks. The wolves are also typical, using standard stats for grey and dire
wolves from the MV.

In this section, we get stats for Kreed, Eveni, and the Runners' archers.

### Wolf Runner Swiftarrow

With the wolves acting as melee muscle, many of the Runners focus on archery
instead. Swiftarrows are Level 5 Artillery with 50 HP. They have decent melee
and ranged attacks with a **short swords** and a **longbow**, and their **Close
Shot** maneuver lets them make a free bow attack whenever an enemy moves
adjacent to them, without provoking attacks of opportunity.

### Eveni Redblade

The tiefling lieutenant is a Level 5 Skirmisher with 60 HP. She's always **On
The Move**, ending any slowing or immobilization effects on her at the start of
her turns. She also does extra damage against targets granting combat advantage
to her.

Eveni fights with a **Longsword** whose basic strikes let her shift 1 square
before or after the attack, and she can also use **Dazing Strikes** (recharge
6+) that as the name implies damage and daze for a turn. Rounding out her
arsenal is the default **Infernal Wrath** power tieflings get, which lets her do
a bit of automatic fire damage to someone who hits her once per encounter.

This is a standard mobile combatant package. Eveni works best with plenty of
people to set up flanks and other advantageous situations for her.

### Sylish Kreed

The (wolf)man of the hour is a Level 6 Elite Skirmisher with 144 HP. He has all
the werewolf signature traits, starting with **Regeneration**, which as usual
shuts down for a turn if he takes damage from silvered weapons.

He can also **Change Shape** to assume human, wolf, or hybrid forms. In human or
hybrid form he can use a **Greatsword** that provides standard basic attacks. In
wolf or hybrid form, he can **Claw** and **Bite**. The claw does more damage to
bloodied targets and lets Kreed shift _4_ squares on a hit. The bite knocks
targets prone and exposes them to werewolf moon frenzy as described in the
Monster Vault. The **Bloodmoon Fury** ability lets him either attack twice with
the sword or make a claw and a bite attack on the same action.

## Final Impressions

I like the Wolf Runners a lot more than I like the lizardfolk, that's for
sure. I also think it's interesting that the Wolf Runners have a lot of other
factions to worry about even if the PCs never fight them directly.

If they really operate on the Trade Road, they're in direct competition with the
Raven Roost gang and/or the Blackfang Gnolls, both of which are a lot more
murderous than themselves. If we instead move them to King's Road, they're going
to contend with the Iron Circle in Harkenwold and possibly with the Daggerburg
Goblins.

All of the Wolf Runners presented here are Unaligned, so you can easily play
them as rogues with hearts of gold and have them as possible allies against an
unjust lord or against some of the other factions, Robin Hood-style.
