---
layout: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Abyssal Plague Demon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-abyssal-plague-demons-01.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

I made a big deal about how there were few "newer and weirder" monsters in this
book, and now it turns out that the very first entry is one of those. Abyssal
Plague Demons are a monster new to 4e.

## The Lore

Despite devoting a lot of text to the lore for abyssal plague demons, the entry
is irritagingly vague. That's because these monsters are actually the main
featured threats of a series of novels published between 2010 and 2012. MV:TNV
was published in 2011, right in the middle of the event.

The Abyssal Plague novels were planned as a big multimedia, multiworld metaplot
event. The novels would take place across multiple published settings, with the
main action taking place in the implied one, and side stories taking place in
Dark Sun and the Forgotten Realms.

The entry here is very vague and avoids naming names, probably out of a fear of
spoiling the event's plot. There's a demon lord who escaped into our universe
from another one he destroyed. He was stopped by "the heroes of the age" and
imprisoned, but recently one of his exarchs managed to escape either it or the
demon lord himself "found a vessel in the world". This entity is responsible for
spreading the Abyssal Plague, a disease that covers its victim's bodies in
growths of alien crystal and either kills them or transforms them into Abyssal
Plague Demons.

With a decade of hindsight, I can give you those spoilers: the "demon lord" is
actually Tharizdun and the thing that came from a another universe that was
destroyed by demons is the Shard of Evil that he used to make the Abyss. In the
novels, one of his worshippers manages to pierce the walls of Tharizdun's prison
with a shard of the Living Gate (an entity described in the [Shardmind][5] post
for the MM3), freeing one of his exarchs. This exarch is an entity known as the
Voidharrow and it is the thing responsible for spreading the Abyssal Plague.

The entry presents the Plague as a rising threat that only recently began to
spread, but doesn't make an effort to connect it to other plot hooks in MV:TNV
or to the wider cosmic stuff at its root. I guess you're supposed to read the
novels to find out about that.

## The Numbers

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-abyssal-plague-demons-02.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Abyssal Plague Demons are creatures mutated by the plague. Some used to be
animals, some used to be humanoids. Aside from a general "demonic" look, they
have a common aesthetic element: red crystal, flecked with gold and silver. This
is present as either visible veins of liquid crystal, or as solid plates of the
stuff that might act as armor or weaponry.

Stat-wise, they're demons: Elemental Beasts or Elemental Humanoids with the
Demon keyword, Darkvision and Variable Resistance (5, switchable twice per
encounter). All of them are also carriers of the Abyssal Plague, which they can
spread via bites or via their natural crystal weaponry. They're all mid-Heroic
tier, making them appropriate for encounters in the middle world as your home
grounds start to suffer from the Plague.

The Abyssal Plague is a Level 8 Disease that follows the standard rules for
this. At the end of any fight where you're exposed to it, you make a saving
throw. If you fail, you contract the disease at Stage 1. At the end of every
extended rest, you make an Endurance test. If you beat the disease's Maintain DC
of 12, you stay as you are. If you beat its Improve DC of 16 your stage
decreases by 1 (Stage 0 means you're cured). If you beat neither you progress to
the next stage. Effects from each stage are cummulative. If you reach Stage 3,
natural recovery is no longer possible and only a Remove Affliction ritual might
save you.

Stage 1 is usually just a nuisance. In this case, 10% of your body is covered in
alien growths and you lose a healing surge. Stage 2 is a major hindrance: here,
it means a -2 to AC, Fortitude and Reflex plus a permanent Slowed condition as
50% of your body is taken over by growths.

Stage 3 is often incapacitating or fatal. Unlike most other diseases, Abyssal
Plague still makes you roll Endurance daily when you're here, but the roll is
not for recovery. If your total roll fails to beat a DC of 12, you die. If you
roll between 12 and 23, you live another day in incredible pain. If you roll a
24 or more, you turn into an Abyssal Plague Demon. So yeah, this plague kills
the weak and turns the strong into demons. You need to apply Remove Affliction
before either happens.

Thankfully, multiple exposures during a fight still mean you only roll the save
once, and if you've already contracted the disease further exposures do nothing
to worsen your condition. So if your PC is tough and your party is on a
tight time-table, you can gamble that you'll be able to recover naturally from
Stage 1. Remove Affliction is a big resource drain if you don't have time for a
long rest.

### Plague Demon Chaos Hound

A Medium Beast demon, this quadruped is a Level 5 Minion Skirmisher with Speed 8
and darkvision. Its **Pack Attack** trait gives it a small damage boost for each
other plague demon that's adjacent to their target.

Their sole attack is a **bite** that allows them to shift 1 square on a hit and
exposes the target to Abyssal Plague. As a minion, it lacks Variable Resistance.

### Plague Demon Chaos Footsoldier

A Medium Humanoid with Speed 6. It's a Level 5 Minion Soldier without Variable
Resistance. Its basic attack is a **Grabbing Claw** that does light damage and
grabs on a hit. Once it has a grabbed victim, the footsoldier can **bite** for a
bit more damage and exposure to the Plague.

### Plague Demon Chaos Beast

The non-minion version of the Chaos Hound is a Level 6 Skirmisher with Speed 8
and 76 HP. Its **Chaotic Growl** acts as an aura (1) that inflicts a -2 attack
penalty to enemies inside. Its basic **bite** damages and exposes to the Plague,
while its **Claws** allow it to shift 1 square on a hit.

### Plague Demon Chaos Bender

A Large Beast demon, this Level 6 Controller has 72 HP and some reality-warping
powers. It projects a **Chaotic Field** as an aura (2) that allows the demon to
shift 2 squares if any enemy ends their turn inside. Its basic attack is a
plague-infected **bite**, and it can also use a **Flurry of Claws** that attacks
a Close Burst 1, slows, and inflicts ongoing physical damage (save ends).

### Plague Demon Chaos Knight

This sapient Medium Humanoid is a Level 6 Soldier with 78 HP. It projects an
aura of **Crimson Retribution** (1) that automatically deals 5 damage to anyone
inside who makes an attack that doesn't target the chaos knight. Its **slams**
damage and knock prone on a hit, and its extruded **Crystal Blade** (recharge
4+) deals heavy damage and exposes to the Plague. Since it's a recharge power,
I'm guessing the blade shatters when used as a weapon.

### Plague Demon Chaos Vanguard

This sapient Large Humanoid is a Level 9 Soldier with speed 6 and 100 HP. It's a
powered-up version of the Knight, with nearly identical traits. Its aura is
wider and deals 10 damage instead of 5; its **slam** pushes 2 squares instead of
knocking prone; and its **Sweeping Crystal Blade** (recharge 4+) is a Close
Burst 3 attack instead of a single-target melee power.

## Final Impressions

Would you believe that I even forgot these things were here? The combination of
epic-sounding but vague lore and mid-Heroic mechanics smells very metaplotty to
me, particularly after I learned about these novels. This is the outer edge of
the plot and you're not allowed to dig deeper, that's what the novel heroes
do. I don't know if they ever released a book that allowed the PCs to be more
central in eliminating the Plague.

The mechanics are functional, but pretty simplistic since the demons' main
gimmick is being carriers for the Abyssal Plague. There's tons of more
interesting opposition in MV:TNV. So, overall, my inclination is to give these
monsters a pass. The next entires are better, I promise!


[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2019/09/23/demon.html" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2022/08/24/imix.html" | relative_url }}
[4]: {{ "/2022/10/04/ogremoch.html" | relative_url }}
[5]: {{ "/2022/10/15/shardmind.html" | relative_url }}
