---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Firbolg"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Firbolgs are inspired by Celtic myth, and I'm sure they must have appeared in
earlier editions in some form. I think their 4e presentation in this book is
new, though.

## The Lore

Firbolgs are giants (not Giants) native to the Feywild. Their culture values
independence and courage, and their religion is a variant of the
Maiden-Mother-Crone triumvirate. This variant has a different goddess in each
role: Sehanine is the Maiden, Melora is the Mother, and the Raven Queen is the
Crone. This generally results in a religion that's themed around the night, the
moon, autumn and winter, instead of the more balanced "classical" version.

Firbolgs live in and protect the deep wilderness of the Feywild, building their
settlements on precarious peaks, floating earth motes, and other such hazardous
heights. Leadership positions are occupied by their mightiest warriors and their
moon seers (priestesses), both of whom wear masks or helmets styled after one of
their deities. They place great value on clan and family ties.

Back when I discussed the [Hounds of the Wild Hunt][2], I speculated that the
hunters would be high-powered eladrin. Well, I was wrong! Turns out the Wild
Hunt is a Firbolg tradition.

You see, while firbolgs are fond of treasure, they place even greater value in
oaths and promises. And when someone breaks an oath made to the firbolgs, they
convene a Wild Hunt to track and punish the infractor. Even people who didn't
betray the firbolgs directly still have reason to fear them, as there's a ritual
that allows someone to sic a Wild Hunt on an oathbreaker. And I imagine they
might also ride out to fulfill sacred missions revealed in the moon seers'
visions.

Wild Hunts vary in size and composition, and might include allied sapients whose
goals and temperament are close to those of the firbolgs themselves. The
mightiest and scariest hunts are led by firbolgs with the oficial title of
Master of the Wild Hunt, who usually act as community leaders while not
fulfilling that role.

PCs might find themselves fighting firbolgs when they stumble on their
territory, since a firbolg attack will likely be the first sign that they did
it. They could also find themselves on the path of a Wild Hunt, or even as their
main target if they manage to piss off someone who can convince the Hunt the PCs
are oathbreakers.

Still, it's possible to negotiate with firbolgs and even approach them
peacefully. The Wild Hunt is harder to parley with, but it's still not
impossible unless the PCs really are oathbreakers. Of course, should their
interests align, the PCs might find themselves riding alongside the hunters.

## The Numbers

Firbolgs are Large Fey Humanoids, and all the ones we see here are
Unaligned. They all have low-light vision and a natural ground speed of 8. They
also have Regeneration 5 (10 at Epic tier), which can be shut down for a turn by
necrotic damage.

They also have a +2 bonus on saves against charm effects, and the immobilized,
slowed and restrained conditions. For elite firbolgs, this stacks with the +2 on
all saves elites get.

Their signature power is **Moonfire** (Ranged 10 vs. Will; minor action;
recharge 4+), which prevents the target from benefitting from cover or
concealment for a turn. It also has additional effects that vary per stat block,
but all generally make the target more vulnerable to that firbolg's attacks. All
of their other powers come from martial or magic training, and their magic has
the same themes as their religion.

### Firbolg Hounder

Hounders are members of firbolg hunting parties whose job is to attack and drive
prey into a position that makes them vulnerable to the other hunters. They wear
scale and wield axes and shields. They're Level 11 Soldiers with 113 HP.

Their basic attack is a Reach 2 **Battleaxe**, and they can use it in a
**Hounding Strike** maneuver that has the same basic stats and also slides the
target 2 squares on a hit. **Drive Prey** is an even more powerful version of
that, doing more damage and allowing a secondary attack vs. Will. If that hits,
the target must move or shift away from the hounder with its first action on its
next turn, or become dazed until the end of that turn. This ability recharges
when the hounder is first bloodied.

At range, the hounder can throw **Handaxes**, which do light physical damage and
knock the target prone. Their **Moonfire** power also marks the target for a
turn. Finally, the **Hunter's Leap** passive trait makes them immune to
opportunity attacks while jumping. They use the standard jumping rules for that.

So it looks like these firbolgs will use Hounding Strike and Drive Prey to slide
enemies into a vulnerable position, and then either stay away and throw
handaxes, or move into melee to try and keep the enemy pinned in place while the
other hunters do their jobs.

### Firbolg Hunter

These are the people the hounder (above) works with. They're level 12
Skirmishers with 123 HP, wear light armor and bring **spears** and **javelins**
to bear agains their prey.

All of their powers enhance their weapon attacks. **Crippling Strike**
(recharges when first bloodied) adds extra damage to an attack and makes it
immobilize the target (save ends) with a Slow after-effect. **Mobile Attack**
allows them to move 8 squares and make a basic attack without provoking
opportunity attacks from the target, or from making ranged attacks. Their
**Moonfire** also makes their weapon attacks do +1d6 damage to the affected
target for a turn.

And finally, they also have Hunter's Leap. It's really hard to run from them,
particularly when there hounders pinning you down.

### Firbolg Moon Seer

Moon Seers are those priestesses I talked about. They're Level 14 Controllers
with 141 HP. They wear masks and light armor, and fight with moon- and
fate-themed magic.

A seer's basic melee attack is a **Moon Mace** that targets Reflex, deals
Radiant damage, and blinds the target until the start of its next turn. Their
**Moonfire** has the additional effect of making targets grand combat advantage
to the seer for a turn. After hitting someone with Moonfire, the seer can use
**Moonstrike** (vs. Will) to deal psychic damage to that victim and dominate
them until the end of the seer's next turn.

There's two other spells **Spirit Hounds** and **Ban of the Raven**.

Spirit Hounds is a blast that targets Reflex and only affects enemies. It deals
psychic damage, slows, and prevents the target from teleporting (save ends),
which is handy when hunting down eladrin or other fey.

Ban of the Raven is the big gun, an encounter power that's a Ranged 10
vs. Fortitude attack. It deals heavy necrotic damage and worsens critical hits!
The affected victim takes critical hits on a natural 18-20 instead of only a 20,
and each such hit deals an extra 10 necrotic damage on top of whatever it would
normally deal. Once the victim saves against that there's still a weaker
aftereffect that makes the victim suffer crits on a 19-20.

### Firbolg Bloodbear

Bloodbears mix in a bit of viking into their Celtic trappings, being able to
turn into bear hybrids. They're Level 15 Elite Brutes with 240 HP.

They fight unarmed, and start out in firbolg form. Once bloodied, they assume
**Bloodbear Form**, recover _all of their HP_, and double their
regeneration. This also upgrades all of their attacks. This transformation lasts
until they're bloodied again, and then it reverts. So in effect they have 360
HP, and will become bears for the middle third of that health bar.

In firbolg form, they fight unarmed with **slams**, and they can slam twice with
**Double Attack**. If they hit both attacks, they can also try to grab the
target. **Bloodbear Maul** allows them to automatically deal heavy physical
damage against the grabbed victim. They have Moonfire, but it's only the basic
version.

In bloodbear form their slams turn into **claw** attacks that gain increased
damage, they gain a **bite** that does even more damage and deals ongoing damage
if the target is granting AC, and Bloodbear Maul also allows them to make a free
bite attack against the grabbed target.

### Firbolg Ghostraven

These are Raven Queen themed assassins. They fight with heavy war picks, which
are not the kind of weapon you'd expect an assassin to use. They can assume the
form of a ghostly raven, which allows them to better hide in shadows and ambush
their intended victims.

Ghostravens are Level 16 Elite Lurkers with 238 HP. Their **picks** are
High-Crit weapons, and they can attack twice with them. If both attacks hit the
victim is blinded (save ends). Assuming **Ghostraven Form** is a minor action
that makes them intangible, gives them a fly speed of 8, and gives them
concealment while in dim light or darkness. When a ghostraven attacks someone
who can't see it, it deals increased damage.

### Firbolg Master of The Wild Hunt

What it says on the tin. These hunt masters usually serve as leaders of firbolg
communities when they're not heading a Wild Hunt.

Hunt Masters are Level 22 Elite Skirmishers with 404 HP. They wear the classic
stag helmet and fight with a **Spear of the Hunt** that can make both melee and
ranged attacks (it returns when thrown). Being elites, they can attack twice per
action.

Their **Moonfire** also marks and makes the target grant combat advantage until
the end of the master's next turn. They deal increased damage to targets
affected by Moonfire (from _any_ firbolg, not just their own).

Their special attack is a **Mortal Strike**, which allows them to make a basic
attack against a bloodied enemy that's an automatic critical and deals 6d6
additional damage. If this reduces the target to 0 HP, it gives an extra action
point to the huntmaster. Action Points, as a reminder, can be spent to give
their owner a whole extra standard action on their turn. All elites start out
with one, and the hunt master is one of the few who can gain more during a
fight.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We get two encounters:

The first is Level 13, a moon seer, a hunter and two hounders plus 2 centaur
hunters. This is either a "lesser" Wild Hunt or just a normal hunting
party/patrol. It hints that there's likely a joint Centaur/Firbolg culture out
there somehwer.

The second is a proper scary Wild Hunt: the Master of the Wild Hunt along with
two Wild Hunt hounds, a bloodbear, and 2 ghostravens. It's level 22, which means
relatively few things in the setting can really stand up to it.

I like firbolgs more than I though I would! There's plenty of information on
them here, and it does plenty to differentiate them from the more standard
giants.

One thing I found a bit awkward are the bits of text in the book that say they
value "the middle path between good and evil". This is derived from one of
Sehanine's commandments, which is equally awkward. What does this mean? Are they
supposed to feed a puppy one day and kick it on the next to keep things
balanced? A more charitable interpretation might be that they're not any more
inclined to trust people who claim to be champions of good than they are anyone
else, and try to stay out of those particular cosmic struggles.


[2]: {{ "/2020/05/30/hound.html" | relative_url }}
