---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Oni"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

As mentioned in my post about [Monster Manual oni][2], oni have been in D&D
since the beginning, but were only called by this name starting in 4e. Before,
they were called by the more generic name of "ogre mage".

There are many different stories about oni in Japanese folklore. The entries
here in the MM2 are inspired by by some of them.

All oni in this entry are Natural Humanoids, and all but one are Large. They
have darkvision and a signature trait named **Deceptive Veil** that allows them
to appear as any Medium or Large humanoid. Those trying to spot the disguise
need to win an opposed Insight test against the monster's Bluff.

## Oni Devourer

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-oni-devourer.png" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Oni Devourer. Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}


These oni are sorcerous tricksters. By day they take the shape of ascetics,
beggars and priests. By night they go out hunting for people to eat. Some
stories tell of a large group of oni devourers that took over an entire isolated
monastery, replacing all the monks and using the disguise to terrorize the
neighboring regions. Devourers can also be found in the service of more powerful
villains as advisors or "court magicians".

Devourers are the only Medium oni in this entry, and are Level 7 Soldiers with
78 HP. An Oni Devourer likely approaches its target in disguise using its
**Deceptive Veil** (which only lets them take Medium forms since they're
Medium). Then it uses **Hypnotic Glare** (Ranged 10 vs. Will) that pulls the
target 5 squares and dazes it (save ends). Once in melee range it's going to use
**Devour** to deal heavy damage and inflict a -5 penalty to the target's saves,
and its basic **claw** attack to damage and slow, preventing the victim from
escaping.

An open fight will likely see the oni in its natural form from the start, but
the general tactic will be the same. Despite not having a marking mechanic like
other Soldiers they end up being quite sticky with their daze/slow/save penalty
combination.

## Oni Overlord


In some stories oni aren't subtle at all and instead lead gangs of monstrous
bandits that try to rob and devour any hapless protagonists they come
across. Oni Overlords are an attempt to translate those individuals to
D&D. They're Level 12 Elite Brutes with the Leader keyword and 296 HP.

Oni Overlords lead through fear: their **Threatening Leader** aura (5) gives a
+5 damage bonus to all allies inside, but also deals 5 psychic damage to them
when they miss all targets with an attack. If you want to mitigate that downside
you should give them allies capable of making area attacks. Conversely, if an
ally damages an enemy, the overlord can use its reaction for a **Violent
Reward** that gives that ally 5 temporary HP.

While closing to melee range, the overlord can use **Overlord's Blast** (close
blast 5 vs. Fortitude; recharges when first bloodied) to deal necrotic and
poison damage to enemies, and also make them vulnerable to those two damage
types (save ends).


## Oni Thunderer

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-oni-thunderer.png" | relative_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Oni Thunderer. Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}



[2]: {{ "/2020/08/17/oni.html" | relative_url }}
