---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Tannaruk"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This one feels like an AD&D 2nd Edition creation, as that's when they renamed
demons as "ta'nari".

## The Lore

Tannaruk are engineered hybrids of orc and demon DNA, the product of rituals
performed by demon lords or ambitious mortal spellcasters. These rituals are
effectively a mass-production process, as they involve pulsing vats and can
create dozens of the creatures at once. In most cases they're immediately put to
work as soldiers and weapons of war, though they're extremely difficult to keep
under control unless they get "enough" opportunity to commit violence. As you
might expect, that's a tall order.

The few free tannaruk bands that exist tend to seek work as mercenaries. Free or
not, they can most often be found in the Astral Sea or Elemental Chaos, usually
fighting something. They do sometimes show up in the middle world, and they love
it because few warriors there can match their skill and resilience in combat.

## The Numbers

Tannaruks are Medium Elemental Humanoids with the Demon and Orc keywords. They
have Darkvision and Speed 6, along with Resist Fire 5. Their signature trait is
**Indomitable Fury**, which kicks in when they drop for 0 HP for the first time
in the fight. It makes them stay at 1 HP instead and gives them +2 to attacks
and +4 to damage until the end of the encounter.

This means the PCs should make sure each Tannaruk in the encounter stays down by
hitting it again before it can get a chance to take more actions. If they don't,
they're going to take more damage; if they do, that's one attack that didn't go
to a healthier monster.

### Tannaruk Marauder

Most tannarusk conform to this stat block, which is your basic enthusiastic axe
murderer. Marauders wear hide and wield a **greataxe**, and can also thrown
**handaxes** at those they can't quite reach.

Their **Nimble Reaction** trait gives them +4 AC against opportunity attacks,
which is good because their signature move relies on fishing for them: **Brutal
Rampage** allows them to move their speed and make a greataxe attack at any
point during the move. This attack gains a +5 damage bonus for each opportunity
attack made against the marauder during the move (but before the attack). The
opportunity attacks don't need to hit, they just need to happen.

### Tannaruk Steel Warrior

This is a bigger tannaruk that received better training and had armor riveted to
its hide. It's a Level 18 Soldier with 177 HP. Its armor counts as plate, and it
wields a shield and a **Longsword**, plus a **Crossbow** for ranged attacks.

The sword marks for a turn, and the warrior can make free attacks against
enemies that ignore the mark. It can also be used in a special attack named
**Burning Cage** (recharge 5+). This melee attack targets Reflex and does heavy
fire damage. The target takes a further 5 fire damage every time it enters a
square during its turn (save ends).

### Tannaruk Flame Speaker

This is a tannaruk spellcaster whose power relies on a connection to the abyssal
flames that go into their production ritual. It's level 17 Artillery with 129
HP and resist 10 fire, a bit higher than usual for them.

The flame speaker fights with a **Staff** in melee, and with **fire bolts** at
range. It can also shoot a **fire barrage** (recharge 5+) that targets up to
three creatures but does a bit less damage than the basic bolt.

Once per encounter, the flame speaker can summon **Winds of Fire**, an area
burst attack that deals fire damage and creates a zone that lasts for the rest
of the encounter. Anyone starting their turn inside takes 10 fire damage and is
pulled 1 square towards the zone's origin square.

In addition to Indomitable Fury, the flame speaker also has **Avenging Fire**,
which triggers when it hits 0 HP for the second time. It deals some automatic
fire damage to the triggering enemy.

## Final Impressions

These stat blocks take up a lot of space on the book, but they're simpler than
they look. Each one has a solid gimmick and appropriate base stats. I guess
tannaruks are meant to be regular enemies for upper paragon PCs - stronger than
minions, but you'll still meet a lot of them.

Lore-wise, I'm not sure I like them. They're more or less D&D's take on the
Uruk-Hai, I guess, but there are a lot more opponents at this level range that
feel cooler and less potentially problematic.
