---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Elemental"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Elementals are a pretty iconic part of D&D, since they've shown up on every book
we've covered so far. The MM1 and MM2 elementals were built to showcase the
mixed nature of the Elemental Chaos, so they were always a different combination
of two or more elements.

This was pretty cool, but it also caused some edition warriors complain that
they missed the traditional single-element quartet from editions past.

The Monster Manual 3 brings the "singlementals" back, with heroic, paragon and
epic variants of all four classic types. The Lesser (heroic) variants would be
reprinted in the Monster Vault, and we already covered them [here][2]. We'll
look at the standards and greaters now.


[2]: {{ "/2020/02/16/elemental.html" | relative_url }}

## Air Elemental

Air Elementals are Lurkers. They have a ground speed of 0, but very high air
speeds with Hover. They also have some degree of vulnerability to Fire.

The Lesser Air Elemental is Level 1 and covered [here][2].

### Air Elemental

This Level 10 Lurker has 81 HP and a flight speed of 8. It has the same
**Phantom on the Wind** trait as the lesser version, which makes it become
invisible when it starts the turn not adjacent to any enemies. This lasts until
the end of its next turn or until it attacks, so it will remain invisible until
it does close in to attack.

Its basic attack is a **slam** with no riders, and it can use a **Rampant
Storm** that does more damage over a Close Burst 3 area and dazes targets that
couldn't see the elemental before it attacked.

Classic lurker tactics: start invisible, Rampant Storm, move away to become
invisible again.

### Greater Air Elemental

This one is Large and Level 20 with 143 HP and a speed of 10. It has most of the
same traits of the standard air elemental with bigger numbers, and it replaces
Rampant Storm with **Engulfing Winds**. This melee attack pulls and grabs the
target. The elemental can move freely with a grabbed victim, which takes 20
ongoing damage until they escape.

This one wants to grab someone and play keep-away.

## Earth Elementals

Earth Elementals are Soldiers. They have a burrow speed equal to their walking
speed. **Earth Glide** allows them to pass through earth and stone as if it had
phasing, and their **Brittle Skin** means they take a -2 penalty to all defenses
for a turn when hit with thunder damage. They attack with **slams**.

As usual, the Lesser Air Elemental is covered in the [MM/MV article][2].

The standard **Earth Elemental** is level 11 with 119 HP and Speed 7. It gains a
**Quake Stomp** attack that covers a selective Close Burst 2 and targets
Fortitude, damaging those it hits, sliding them 2 squares, and knocking them
prone.

The **Greater Earth Elemental** is Large, Level 22 with 212 HP, and replaces
Quake Stomp with **Flattening Stomp**, which targets a single creature for heavy
physical damage and automatically knocks all enemies within 2 squares of the
target prone.

## Fire Elementals

Fire Elementals are skirmishers. They run very fast and can fly, though not as
well as an air elemental. Their **slams** deal only ongoing fire damage, and
**Flickering Flame** allows them to shift a number of squares as a minor
action. If they're hit with cold damage, though, they're **Frozen in Place** and
can't shift for a turn.

All elementals have a reaction ability that deals some sort of fire damage
around them when they're hit by an attack. This gets more powerful as the
elemental gets bigger. Lessers are level 1, standards Level 11, and Greaters
level 21.

## Water Elementals

Water elementals are controllers. They have a swim speed equal to their ground
speed, and are **Aquatic**. This gives them attack bonuses against non-aquatic
enemies when fighting underwater. They're **Sensitive to Cold**, and after
taking cold damage they gain Vulnerable 5 against the _next_ attack to hit them
before the end of their next turn.

Their **slams** do some physical damage and inflict ongoing physical damage from
the water that gets into people's lungs.  **Drowning Essence** allows them to
slide victims taking this ongoing damage as a minor action.

Their special attack seems to be surging like a wave, dealing damage and pushing
or sliding people around. It gets more damaging, more frequent, and pushier the
bigger the elemental gets. It has different names for each elemental: **Whelm**
for Lessers, **Whirlpool** for standards, and **Surging Waves** for Greaters.

## Final Impressions

I guess you can notice me getting gradually more bored with classic elementals
as I wrote the above post. These ones are better than they used to be in earlier
editions, but I can understand why the Monster Vault only reprinted the
lessers. The more powerful versions are pretty much the kind of thing you can
write yourself using the standard monster leveling rules.

[2]: {{ "/2020/02/16/elemental.html" | relative_url }}
