---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Elemental"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Technically, any creature with the "elemental" origin is an elemental, but as we
saw in the [Elemental][2] entry from the first monster manual the name is also
used for a particularly wild subset of that plane's denizens.

As you can see in that earlier post, Elementals proper are some of the "basest"
life forms of the Elemental Chaos, with bodies that share a lot more with their
constituent elements than with any sort of living organism. Unlike demons
they're not actively malicious, but they're mercurial and easy to provoke into a
rampage.

As magical beasts, they're technically sapient, but their intellects tend to be
rather limited. These creatures are also often bound by elementally-inclined
ritual casters such as mortal wizards, efreets, and others.

The MM2 presents us with more elementals ranging from the mid-Heroic to the
early Epic tier.

## Chillfire Destroyer

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-chillfire-destroyer.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

A Large humanoid made of ice wrapped around a fiery core, which means it has
zero chill. It's a Level 14 Brute with 173 HP, lumbering about at Speed 5. It
has 10 resistance to cold and fire, and is immune to disease and poison. Its
**fists** do a mix of fire and cold damage, and it can also move its speed and
**trample** anyone it comes into contact with during this movement.

As this elemental gets damaged, its shell begins to crack. Once it's bloodied,
its **Leaking Firecore** acts as an aura (radius 2) that deals fire damage to
anyone caught inside. Once it reaches 0 HP, a **Firecore Breach** causes it to
explode! This explosion is a Close Burst 3 vs. Reflex, dealing heavy fire
damage.

## Dust Devil

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-dust-devil.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

A being or air and earth, this capricious living whirlwind has a tendency to
sandblast anyone who makes it angry. It's Small, and a Level 3 Skirmisher with
47 HP and a ground speed of 8. No, they can't fly. It's immune to disease and
poison, and it suffers a -2 penalty to all of its defenses if slowed or
immobilized.

Its basic attack is **Grasping Winds**, which targets Reflex, does some physical
damage and slides the target 3 squares. **Gale Blast** allows it to shift 5
squares by moving really fast, and try to knock anyone in the way prone (attack
vs. Fortitude).

Once per encounter it can do that sandblasting trick with **Stinging Sands**
(close burst 3 vs. Fortitude), which does heavy damage and blinds for a turn.

## Flamespiker

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-flamespiker.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These are a triple combination of air, earth, and fire, taking the form of a
Medium stony humanoid who can use high-pressure air to fire red-hot spikes from
its fiery core. They're more like people than wildlife, and often end up hired
as front-line muscle by other sapient elementals.

Flamespikers are level 5 soldiers with 66 HP and a ground speed of 7. Their
immunities include disease, poison, and petrification, and they also have 10
fire resistance.

The flamespiker fights with its Reach 2 **Stonespikes** in melee, and can also
fire them at out to range 10 as **Spikebolts**. Both attacks do physical damage,
and the melee one also makes the target vulnerable to fire damage until the end
of the spiker's next turn. So it pairs really well with fire elementals.

If an enemy within reach shifts, the stonespiker can react with a **Thunderfire
Thrust** (recharge 5+), which is a basic melee attack with an extra follow-up
against Fortitude that does 5 thunder damage and stuns (save ends). This makes
slipping past them a difficult proposition.

## Geonid

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-geonid.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This Large creature has more of a metabolism than most elementals, and needs to
hunt. A stony oyster-like creature, the geonid is extremely hard to tell apart
from a boulder when its shell is closed. When it reveals itself, we can see that
it's yet another tentacular ambush predator that lives in the shallow Underdark.

They were initially created to guard the secret pathways of the world, and the
secret caches of weapons, dormant war-beasts, and treasure hidden there by the
forces of the primordials. Some of those caches are still out there, as are
their guardians.

Geonids are Level 6 Lurkers with 56 HP. They're immune to disease, petrification
and poison, and cal roll around at speed 4. With its shell closed, potential
victims must pass a DC 28 Perception check to realize it's not a harmless
boulder. At level 6, this is hard even for the party's "radar".

Once the geonid strikes, it fights with **tentacle** slaps that do standard
physical damage. It can also use a **capturing grab** that consists of two
weaker tentacle attacks. If both hit, it grabs the target (escape DC 17).

Once it's grabbed someone, the geonid will close itself with **Shell Slam**,
which does a lot of things at once. It slides a grabbed victim to the geonid's
space, and it tries to knock everyone in a close burst 2 prone (vs. Fortitude).

While the shell is closed, the geonid has a ground speed of 0 and a +5 to all of
its defenses, and it can't target anyone other than the grabbed victim it pulled
inside its shell. The victim can also only target the geonid, but on the bright
side it won't have to contend with the defense bonus. If the victim escapes, it
gets spit out and appears adjacent to the geonid, who can open its shell with a
minor action.

## Mudlasher

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-mudlasher.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Another sapient elemental predator, mudlashers are made of well, mud. They slam
and drown their victims, and then sit atop the corpse as a puddle to slowly
digest it. They're Medium Level 4 Brutes with 63 HP.

Their basic **Slams** do physical damage, and once per fight they can upgrade
that to a **Drowning Slam** that targets Fortitude and adds an ongoing damage
follow-up (save ends).

They can also fling **mud balls** at range (vs. Reflex), which do no damage but
slow their targets. If a target is already slowed, it's immobilized
instead. This is good because the mudlasher gets a +2 to attacks against slowed
or immobilized targets. A save will end either condition.

## Rockfist Smasher

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-rockfist-smasher.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The name says it all: they're humanoid rocks that like to smash with their
fists. Smashers don't need to eat, so they do that for fun. People who build
elemental themed dungeons like to gather a bunch of these and lock them in
chambers and at the bottom of pits as living traps.

These hooligans are Large, Level 10 Brutes with 125 HP, the standard suite of
earth-creature immunities, and a speed of 5. Their **Granite Punches** do good
damage and knock bloodied targets prone.

When a smasher gets bloodied itself, its **Internal Avalanche** triggers and
begins accumulating kinetic energy. This gives the smasher 20 temporary HP. If
it still has any temp HP at the start of its next turn, it gains an action point
that must be used in that turn.

## Shardstorm Vortex

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-rockfist-smasher.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These are living blizzards made of stone instead of ice. Despite this impressive
description, they're just Medium in size and are the scavengers of the Elemental
Chaos. Shardstorms follow in the wake of more impressive beings and feed on what
remains of their battles. In battle they work like slightly stronger dust
devils.

They're level 7 skirmishers with 80 HP. Their ground speed is 0, but they fly at
speed 8 with hover capability and project a **Sandblast** aura (radius 1) that
inflicts a -2 to all defenses of anyone caught inside.

Their basic attack is a **Abrasive Slam** that targets Fortitude and does
physical damage. They can also perform **Whirling Blasts** (recharge 5+) that
allow them to shift 4 squares and an attack at the end. This does heavy damage
and pushes 1 square on a hit. It does half damage on a miss.

We also get two variant stat blocks for them as minions at levels 13
and 23. They still have the aura and the basic attack, but instead of the Blast
they get a **Vortex Step**, an at-will 4-square shift with no built-in attack.

## Stormstone Fury

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-stormstone-fury.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is a Medium stone humanoid infused with the power of a storm. It can throw
explosive stones, cause shrapnel to fly outward from its body, and meld into the
ground for a quick escape. When fighting as part of a team they don't really
care about catching allies in their blasts, so if you find yourself on the same
side as one of these, bring some thunder protection.

Furies are Level 14 Artillery with 113 HP and Speed 6. They have the usual
immunity suite, and 10 thunder resistance. Its **Grinding Stones** melee basic
attack is terrible, but its **Hurtling Thunderstones** have Range 20 and do half
damage on a miss. Hit or miss, they also cause a follow-up explosion (burst 2
vs. Fortitude) that does thunder damage.

**Shrapnel Burst** is their "keep away from me" power, sending shrapnel that
pushes 2 squares and does physical and thunder damage in a close burst 2
(vs. AC). If that fails, **Meld to Ground** removes them from the map for a
turn, after which they reappear up to 10 squares away.

## Tempest Wisp

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-tempest-wisp.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This gaseous creature is a bit smarter than your average elemental, and actively
seeks to either ally with or coerce other creatures to form groups that
cooperate against threats. It uses its wind powers to push enemies around the
battlefield, and hides behind its allies to avoid damage.

Tempest Wisps are Level 13 Controllers with 134 HP. They're immune to disease
and poison, and are insubstantial while not bloodied (i.e, while at over 50%
HP). They have a flight speed of 7 with hover capability.

Their basic attack is an **Air Slash** (vs. Reflex) that does physical damage,
and they can attack at range with **Whistling Wind** (ranged 10 vs. Reflex) for
about the same damage and a 1-square slide.

Their limited special attack is hilarious! Named **Tumbling Updraft** (ranged 10
vs. Fortitude; recharge 5+), it does no immediate damage but instead lifts the
target 20 feet up on a hit and restrains them (save ends). Each failed save
causes the victim to be tossed up another 20 feet. On a successful save, the
victim falls! That's a minimum of 2d10 fall damage, plus another 2d10 for every
failed save. It's all subject to the standard rules for falls, though, so you
might be able to reduce or avoid this damage in the usual ways.

## Windfiend Fury

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-windfiend-fury.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Yet another Angry Tornado, this one more purely "stormy" than the others. These
Large beings like to hang around elemental storms, and so tend to get swept away
into other planes. Sometimes archons will capture them and bind them to their
flying ships as a power source and as a means to travel to other planes. You can
also say these are the beings trapped at the core of those Eberron flying ships.

These are Level 12 Controllers with 123 HP and a flight speed of 8. Aside from
the usual immunities to disease and poison they have 15 resistance to lightning
and thunder.

They attack in melee with **Flying Debris**, and toss **Lightning Strikes** at
range that do lightning damage and daze for a turn. Their "keep away!" power is
a **Storm Burst** that does thunder damage and teleports them to just outside
the area of effect.

## Windstriker

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-elemental-windstriker.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Our final Angry Tornado is Medium, and a Level 9 Lurker with 56 HP. They have
the usual immunities and full-time insubstantiality, along with a flight speed
of 8. It attacks unpredictably, though apparently not to feed.

All of their attacks do "cold and thunder" damage. They're probably going to
open up with **Searching Wind** (ranged 10 vs. Will), which knocks prone on a
hit and marks the target as the windstriker's quarry as an effect. Then they'll
follow that up with **Lethal Windstrike** (melee 2 vs. AC), which hits hard but
only works against the quarry. Their basic **Windstrike** is a lot weaker, so
it's for emergencies only.

If the windstriker takes damage, it activates **Shifting Wind** as a reaction,
which gives it the ability to ignore opportunity attacks and pass through enemy
spaces during its next turn. So it's going to be flitting back and forth to
alternate marking someone as a quarry and attempting to assassinate them.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

There's a whole bunch of sample encounters here, but they're all easily to
described: assorted elementals of similar level, occasionally with someone who
might be the spellcaster binding them, like a tiefling heretic or a beholder.

I like the lore of elementals in 4e on principle, and we have lots of
mechanically varied stat blocks here... but there's _so many_ of them that they
all kinda started blurring together by the end. I almost wish we had gotten an
elemental "plug-in" module for the 4e monster design system rather than this
long list full of angry rock giants and angry living tornadoes.

[2]: {{ "/2020/02/16/elemental.html" | relative_url }}
