---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Cactus"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

Cacti are an important part of the Athasian ecosystem, and their natural water
collection mechanisms are often vital to allow people to survive in its
deserts. But in Dark Sun, sometimes the cactus drinks you.

This entry presents two D&D Plant Monsters with that Darker and Sunnier edge to
them.

## Zombie Cactus

One of the most prized cactus species in Athas is the Flowering Oasis Cactus, a
beautiful plant whose sweet fruit can instantly satisfy someone's hunger or
thirst. Finding one of those out in the desert can be a real lifesaver.

The Zombie Cactus takes advantage of this by looking exactly like a Flowering
Oasis Cactus to draw its victims in. Its fruit is just as sweet, but it's filled
with mind-affecting poison nectar that dominates those who eat it. If the victim
is too wary to eat, the cactus can release a cloud of spores that has the same
effect before uncoiling its tendrils to deal with anyone still free. People
killed while under the cactus' influence immediately raise as zombie cactus
thralls.

All of this is way too evil to be a coincidence. Sages believe zombie cacti are
an engineered bioweapon, the work of slavers aided by psychic powers and
defiling magic. The creatures proved too uncontrollable, and enough escaped
their creators to take root in the wild.

### The Numbers

Zombie Cacti are Large Natural Magical Beasts with the Plant tag. Yes, they're
intelligent. They're also Level 11 Elite Lurkers with 182 HP, Tremorsense 10,
and a ground speed of 2 with Earth Walk. Yes, they're ambulatory.

You'll usually find the cactus in its **Innocuous Form**, which is nearly
identical to a flowering oasis cactus (Nature DC 27 to notice the
difference). It can do nothing in this state except assume its true form as a
minor action. While disguised, the cactus has Resist 15 all and
Regeneration 5. Wearing the disguise again takes a standard action.

A disguised cactus is still dangerous because of its **Poison Fruit**, described
as a passive trait. It will have between four and eight of these, which can be
eaten as a minor action. Anyone who eats them is dominated by the cactus as
described below (save ends). Note there's no attack roll here - eat the fruit,
get dominated, period.

Once the jig is up, the cactus uncoils and releases a cloud of **Dominating
Spores** (close burst 3 vs. will), which dominates on a hit (save ends). Targets
who are at 0 HP or lower can no longer save against this, and the burst also
creates a spore-filled zone that inflicts -5 to saves against the domination for
a turn. This power recharges when the cactus uses Innocuous Form, giving us our
"lurker loop" (breathe out, breathe in).

Once enough people are dominated, the cactus will use its **Tendrils**, which do
standard damage and an additional ongoing 10 necrotic (save ends) if the target
is dominated by the cactus. **Lashing Tendrils** lets it attack two different
targets with this attack.

When someone dominated by the cactus dies, they become a Zombie Cactus Thrall at
the start of their next turn. This zombie is a Level 11 Minion Brute. It can
**Slam** and **Grab** for the same amount of damage, but it prefers the later
because it can pull grabbed targets along with itself when it moves (probably
closer to the cactus). When it drops to 0 HP, it releases a **Spore Burst** in a
Close Burst 1 that has the same attack bonus and effects as the cactus' cloud!

If the PCs want to resurrect a victim of the cactus, they must destroy the
corresponding thrall first. After that, the usual rituals can be applied.

## Hunter Cactus

These aren't engineered bioweapons. They're "merely" fast, aggressive predators
that pose as innocent plants and use their venomous spines to drain the blood of
their prey.

A Hunter Cactus is a Large Natural Magical Beast with the Plant tag, and a Level
12 Lurker with 82 HP. It has Tremorsense 20 and a ground speed of _six_.

When the hunter cactus stands still, it takes a DC28 Nature check to realize
it's not a mundane plant. It will probably begin its attack with a **Spine
Burst** (close burst 3 vs. Reflex, recharge 5+). It deals no damage right away,
but inflicts 20 ongoing poison damage and blindness (save ends both)! From then
on it will use its **Feeding Spine** on any blinded creatures, damaging and
grabbing them on a hit. It can grab up to two creatures this way. A minor action
lets it sustain all grabs and auto-damage the grabbed creatures.

Fortunately, the cactus cannot run away with grabbed creatures, so it will stand
its ground and fight any remaining foes with **Slams** that deal standard damage
and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends). If the cactus is hit while it has a
creature grabbed, the **Psychic Feedback** reaction deals psychic damage to the
victim equal to the damage the cactus just took.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

Zombie cacti are found in the wild alone or in pairs, surrounded by thralls who
rise up to fight when the cactus reveals itself. Note they are _magical beasts_,
and therefore capable of forming alliances with other creatures. Commonly, that
will be a wild predator who they train to draw victims to the cactus so they can
share the spoils. Sometimes other people will coerce a zombie cactus into
service, a fate it will always try to escape.

Hunter cacti are more amenable to cooperation with humanoids, who can easily
train them to attack only designated targets in exchange for being regularly fed
when out of combat. In these cases they will be found alongside other guardians.

These are neat, and very nasty. Cactus drinks you indeed.
