---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Tembo"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-tembo.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A tembo, who looks like a giant scaled rat with sabertooth fangs.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

If our previous entry was kind of vague about whether tareks were a product of
the genocidal "Cleansing Wars" in Athas' distant past, this one is pretty
categorical. Tembos are bioengineered terror weapons, created using the magic
most foul for the purposes of facilitating genocide.

The "Champions" of that time (which unknown to most are the sorcerer-kings of
today) created them to sneak upon the homes of their opponents, and take from
them those they loved most. In addition to their stealthy forms and sharp fangs,
they received a limited ability to blend with shadows, the power to bite
someone in the soul, and a sophisticated intellect that is entirely devoted to
finding new ways of fulfilling their purpose in crueler ways.

They have survived as a species to this day, roaming mainly through the western
wastelands of the Tyr region, but they have been sighted elsewhere too. There's
no one to give them specific targets any more, so they choose their victims for
themselves, for food and fun.

Confirmation that a tembo is targetting a settlement is one of the only things
that will immediately end any infighting and other disagreements and make its
whole population unite against the threat. Everyone hates these things.

How exactly these attacks happen vary with the creature's whims, as well as with
what it judges to be the most effective tactic for a given situation. Sometimes
they stay hidden and let their deadly magical aura slowly kill the population,
and sometimes they tear people apart in broad daylight.

## The Numbers

Tembos are Medium Aberrant Magical Beasts and Level 6 Solo Skirmishers with 280
HP. Their **Killing Presence** acts as an aura (2) that deals 5 necrotic damage
to anyone who starts their turn inside. When the tembo is bloodied, its _second_
aura kicks in. **Tainted Wounds** (aura 5) halves any HP recovery from healing
effects for those inside.

As a solo, the tembo has **Double Actions**, meaning it rolls initiative twice
and takes full turns in both counts. And finally, it's **Immovable**, being
completely immune to any kind of forced movement, and getting a free save
against being knocked prone.

The monster's main attack is a **Bite** that damages, inflicts a -2 attack
penalty for a turn, and serves as a carrier for the **Unspeakable Violation**
secondary attack. This targets Fortitude, and on a hit eats a healing surge and
doubles the damage from Killing Presence against that target for a
turn. Fortunately, it has Recharge 6+, so it doesn't happen with every bite.

Its attack it's likely to use the most is a **Raking Assault**, which deals the
same damage as the bite then lets the Tembo shift 4 squares and use the bite. So
that's two or three attacks for the price of one, with the creature being able
to do this two times per round.

Its camouflage powers take two forms: **Blending** (encounter) is a move action
that makes the tembo invisible for a turn or until its next attack. And **Shadow
Evasion** (recharge when first bloodied) is a reaction that triggers when it's
hit by a melee or ranged attack, letting it shift 4 squares and become
insubstantial for a turn.

Having two full turns per round can actually make Blending last even less, so
it's not something a tembo will use to lie in wait for a long time. It will
instead rely on mundane stealth for this. Then it will charge in, use as many
Raking Assault flurries as it can, and combine Shadow Evasion with Blending to
escape from sight, only coming back to attack when its enemies' guards are
down. Its ability to delete healing surges makes such long-term harassment
tactics even more effective. Fighting the creature to the finish will require
preventing its escape somehow.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

What a horrible, horrible monster.

Tembos are almost always found alone. As mentioned above, everyone hates these
things. They will sometimes join together in small packs, but these end up
breaking apart pretty soon because they suck at organizing themselves.

[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
