---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Dragons"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Woohoo, more dragons. The first Monster Manual (and the Vault) focused on
chromatic dragons, which are the classic draconic opponents, and now the second
one talks about the metallics.

The earliest metallic dragons were the Golds, who appeared alongside the
chromatic set in BECMI and might have been around even earlier than that. AD&D
1st Edition had a whole set in its Monster Manual. Here, we're going to look at
a slightly different set. This is an introductory post, with the next handful of
them each covering a different "color" of dragon.

## The Lore

In editions past, metallic dragons used to be various shades of Good, something
which settings like Dragonlance really leaned into. Things are a bit more
complex here.

Metallics still venerate Bahamut in his role as the Platinum Dragon. They're
more likely to interact peacefully with PCs and other sapients, but they can
still be quite full of themselves and are very protective of their territory and
treasure. If they perceive someone as a threat, they won't hesitate to crush
that someone. And just like you can have friendly chromatics, you can also have
villainous metallics.

In either case they tend to have a scholarly temperament. They prefer lairs that
have some cultural or academic significance in addition to the usual
requirements of isolation and defensibility and their treasure hoards are
curated like museum collections. The typical metallic dragon loves engaging in
learned discourse, and has a keen ability to sense lies. They deal very harshly
with people who try to fool or, gods forbid, steal from them.

Like all dragons they see very few other creatures as their peers, but will
allow a group of "lessers" to gather around themselves. They tend to see these
as students and wards, instead of slaves and worshippers. A metallic dragon is
not going to set itself up as a god, but as a _university professor_.

This entry has five dragon types: Adamantine, Copper, Gold, Iron and
Silver. From what I gather, Adamantine and Iron dragons made it into the main
metallic lineup in 4e to replace bronze and brass dragons, which weren't
distinct enough from Copper dragons at a glance. I think I agree with that
reasoning. While I'm sure these dragons have their own mechanical distinctions,
I sure can't recall what they were just from looking at their names.

## The Numbers

As usual for dragons, the ones we get here are all solos, and each has several
stat blocks representing different age categories: Young, Adult, Elder and
Ancient. Young dragons only have the most basic versions of their powers, and
both improve them and gain new ones as they age. Their mechanical design is
closer to that of the first Monster Manual than to the one from the Vault.

All dragons have darkvision, resistance to the same element they breathe, and
both combat and overland flight speeds. All of them get a different **Breath
Weapon**, as well as the **Bloodied Breath** trait and the **Frightful
Presence** attack.

Bloodied Breath works as usual: when the dragon is first bloodied, its breath
weapon recharges and it uses it immediately as a free action. Frightful Presence
is a Close Burst 10 vs. Will encounter power that does no damage but stuns for a
turn and has a -2 attack penalty (save ends) as an after-effect.

We'll begin discussing the dragon types individually in the next few posts.
