---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Golem"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
    - lets-read
---

That's the title of the entry, but I'll try to not to use it outside of the
monster names since it's a bit appropriative.

## The Lore

As as far as D&D goes, these are our "top-tier" constructs, usually placed in
guardian roles but sometimes found following their creator around and responding
to direct commands from them. They're made by binding an elemental into a
physicall shell made out of some material, as we saw in the Monster Manual/Vault
reading.

Bone, clay, flesh and stone constructs are as common here as they are in other
settings, but not even the wealthiest and most wasteful of Sorcerer Kings would
make a construct out of iron, let alone other metals. Instead, Athasian wizards
have developed other models made of more commonly available materials. This
doesn't mean they're common, as most of the rituals to make them have been lost,
and even those who still know them don't necessarily know the theory behind the
recipe.

Mind you, metal constructs might still be found in the depths of some Green Age
or Red Age ruins, and they're exceedingly dangerous.

## The Numbers

All of our specimens here are Large Natural Animates with the Construct
tag. They're immune to disease, poison, and sleep. Everything else varies per
stat block.

### Salt Golem

This is a construct made out of rock salt, which has some different properties
from common stone. The most relevant here is that it's surrounded by a haze of
salt particles shed from its main body, which it can control. Salt is highly
toxic at these concentrations and it can send it right into your bloodstream if
you have any open wounds.

Salt constructs are Level 11 Elite Brute with 278 HP, a ground speed of 5
(cannot shift), and Darkvision. They're surrounded by a haze of **Toxic Salt**
that acts as an aura (2), which inflicts -2 to the defenses of any enemy
inside. If the enemy is bloodied, it also takes 5 poison damage when it starts
its turn in the aura.

The creature attacks with the now-traditional **Slam**, which deals heavy damage
and on a hit inflicts 5 ongoing poison damage and -2 to attacks (save ends
both). **Double Attack** lets it slam twice in one action. Its special attack
controls that salt cloud to cause **Horrid Dehydration** (close burst 3, enemies
only, recharge 4+), which damages then weakens and slows for a turn. If the
target is bloodied it the conditions become (save ends both) instead.

### Dune Golem

This is a construct made out of loose sand bound by air magic. It can hold a
humanoid shape, but it's diffuse instead of solid, making it particularly
resistant to conventional attacks.

A dune construct is a Level 13 Elite Soldier with 184 HP. It has a ground speed
of 5, and a burrow speed of 5 on loose earth. In addition to the standard
immunities to disease, sleep, and poison, it also takes half damage from melee
and ranged attacks. Unlike its solid cousins from this entry, it can shift.

The creature is surrounded by an aura (2) of **Gusting Sands**, which counts as
difficult terrain for enemies inside. Whenever such an enemy tries to stand up
from prone inside the aura, they must roll a save. If they fail, they stay prone
and waste the action they spent trying to get up. We also see the **Unhindered**
trait here, which lets the construct pull grabbed victims along when it moves.

The construct's **Slams** deal the usual damage, and grab on a hit. It can have
up to two grabbed victims, and can sustain the grabs for free. It has **Double
Attack**, so it could two victims in the same action if it hits with both slams.

Grabbed victims are susceptible to **Engulf**, a minor action attack that deals
light damage but starts inflicting ongoing 15 damage until the grab ends!  And
then you have **Shifting Sands** a move action power that lets the construct
either shift its speed, or to shift half its speed and gain phasing during this
movement. While shifting, it ignores difficult terrain and can move through
enemy spaces, so this is a good escape hatch in addition to being a way to play
keep-away with the suffocating grabbed victims and their allies. One special
condition with the phasing here is that it only works if the surface in question
has a hole wide enough to let a grain of sand through, which shouldn't be a
problem in most cases.

### Obsidian Golem

Another construct made from a type of stone with specific properties. In this
case, obsidian is more or less natural volcanic glass. Like the stone they're
made from, these constructs are very very sharp. They're also deceptively fast.

They are Level 19 Elite Soldiers with 358 HP. Their speed is merely 4 and they
cannot shift, but they're **Razor Sharp**. This property is modeled as an aura
(1). Any enemy inside the aura that moves to another square inside the aura
takes 10 damage.

Instead of Double Attack, obsidian constructs have **Inexorable Action**, which
lets them roll initiative twice and take two whole turns per round at those
counts.

The constructs **Slams** deal the usual brute-tier damage, push 1 square, knock
prone, and inflict ongoing 5 damage (save ends) from the bits of obsidian that
break off and get stuck in the wound. It can also use a **Stunning Handclap**
(recharge 6+) which attacks all enemies in a Close Burst 5. On a hit it deals
thunder damage and stuns for a turn!

A lucky recharge roll might let the creature use this twice in a round, which is
a very bad thing for the PCs.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

You're gonna run into some of these things eventually in any D&D campaign that
goes on for long enough, and these ones are reasonably interesting.

If guarding a site, they'll either be accompanied by more constructs or by other
long-lasting guardians such as undead, devils, or demons. If found as
bodyguards, they'll be accompanied by their masters and any other goons you care
to add to the group.
