---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Shadar-Kai"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-shadar-kai.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

I believe shadar-kai originated in 3e, though they were completely different
there. Here, they are only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

Just as the Feywild contains fantastical reflections of wordly life forms, so
does the Shadowfell present its own menagerie of dark reflections. The
Shadar-kai seem to be the shadowy counterparts of humanity, being similar in
shape and build but with ashen grey skin and black orbs for eyes. They live in
the Shadowfell, venerate the Raven Queen and achieve a level of goth that can't
be found in the middle world.

Shadar-kai culture and society are described as pitiless and meritocratic, and
merit is measured by the great deeds you have to your name more than by wealth
or personal connections. Note that _great_ doesn't necessarily mean
_good_. Causing great chaos and suffering in the world is a great deed. So is
murdering your rivals if they are themselves badass. Acting in the name of the
Raven Queen counts, and isn't a guarantee the service in question will be
nice. Even a Good shadar-kai is likely to be a very gloomy and humorless
individual. "Perky goth" is not really something they do.

Another significant trait of shadar-kai culture is that they do not fear death,
for they know the Raven Queen will see to their souls when they shuffle off this
mortal coil. This might make them seem more extreme in all they do to someone
from a more standard fantasy culture. Another monster entry ahead will hint that
shadar-kai desire immortality despite not fearing death, so maybe this focus on
great deeds has something to do with that. If you die anyway, at least people
will remember how badass you were.

Other sources would go on to make shadar-kai Dark Eldar-like, justifying the
piercings and body art saying they pursue extreme sensation as a way to stave
off the soul-draining malaise of the Shadowfell. I think this is going a bit
overboard, personally. "They really like percings" should be reason enough for
shadar-kay to have them!

## The Numbers

Shadar-kai are typically Unaligned, which means the ones you meet might be evil,
good, or doing something totally ortoghonal to your goals. Just like humans! I
think they even got a playable writeup in Heroes of Shadow, though I don't have
that book so I can't confirm.

Their signature traits are low-light vision (a necessity in the Shadowfell) and
**Shadow Jaunt**, an encounter power which allows them to teleport up to 3
squares and become insubstantial for a turn. All their other abilities derive
from training and vary per stat block.

### Shadar-kai Chainfighter

This is a Level 6 Skirmisher with 68 HP and speed 6. It wields a Reach 2
**Spiked Chain** in combat and its special attack is the **Dance of Death**
(recharge 6). This allows it to shift 6 squares and make up to three basic chain
attacks against different enemies along the move. These attacks deal a bit of
bonus necrotic damage.

This stat block might also be reskinned into a lower-level khyton devil. Despite
the similar chain theme, khytons and shadar-kai aren't actually related here.

### Shadar-kai Gloomblade

A swordsman that uses shadow magic to supplement its techniques. It's a Level 6
Lurker with 54 HP and Speed 5. It wears chain and wields a **Greatsword**.

As a move action the gloomblade can use **Veil of Shadows** to become invisible
until the end of its turn and move its speed. This can only be used while it's
unbloodied. This pairs with the **Gloomstrike** passive trait, which adds a
"blinded for a turn" rider to attacks made against targets that can't see the
gloomblade.

This makes them good at focus fire - use the Veil to get close to the chosen
victim, and keep hitting them with Gloomstrike to keep them blind and
vulnerable. If you miss, use the Veil or Shadow Jaunt to get away and try again.

### Shadar-kai Witch

This Level 7 Controller has 77 HP and is all about shadow magic. It fights in
melee with a **Blackfire Touch** (vs. Reflex) that does fire and necrotic
damage. At range it uses **Beshadowed Mind** (ranged 10 vs. Will; recharge 4-6)
to cause necrotic damage and limit the target's sight range to 2 squares (save
ends).

Once per encounter it can cast a spell named **Deep Shadow**, animating the
shadows around itself. This works as an aura 2 that provides concealment to
allies, and deals 5 damage to enemies caught inside. It can be sustained with a
minor action, but dissipates if the witch uses Shadow Jaunt or moves more than
half its speed in a turn.

### Shadar-kai Warrior

The warrior is a Level 8 Soldier with 86 HP. It wields paired **katars** and can
make a **double attack** in its action. Its main special technique is **Cage of
Gloom** (recharge 5-6), in which it makes a basic katar attack that causes
shadowy tendrils to materialize and envelop the enemy. This is a secondary
attack against Reflex, and a hit restrains the target (save ends).

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Two encounters:

- Level 6: 2 chain fighters, 2 gloomblades, 1 mad wraith. These are likely not
  loyal servants of the Raven Queen, who dislikes undead.

- Level 8: 1 witch, 1 warrior, 2 rot scarab swarms and 1 spectral panther. The
  panther is likely a pet, and the scarabs either opportunists or controlled by
  magic.

I kinda like shadar-kai. Their extreme gothness is a very distinctive look, and
I find it less annoyingly edgy than what Pathfinder did with Khytons. I also
like that they're unaligned, meaning it's common to find them as either enemies
or allies.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
