---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Demon, Klurichir"
tags
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The Abyss is home to several powerful demon lords, each of whom has their own
ruinous designs on the rest of the universe and is building an army to enact
those designs. Yet these armies never seem to leave the Abyss to start their
invasions. One of the reasons for this is that the demon lords hate each other
as much as they hate everything else, and spend much of their time locked in
eternal bloody warfare. Another one is that you have huge hordes of "unclaimed
demons" who sit around and smoulder with generic rage, focusing on their own
immediate concerns instead of larger schemes.

Well, it looks like the seed of cosmic evil at the bottom of the Abyss has had
enough of this lack of focus, so it started producing a special brand of demon
from pure elemental evil energy and sending them to the upper layers to clean
house. These are the klurichirs.

Every klurichir is a contender for the rank of demon lord, and has a real shot
at it given enough time. They differ from the existing demon lords in that they
were never primordials, but were instead born as demons.

These demons are quick to take control of those unclaimed hordes, and use them
to shake things up in the Abyss. They do this by throwing them against the
forces of the incumbent demon lords as they fight each other. They surround
themselves with other epic-tier officers like balors and nafelshnees, and spend
the lives of their lesser underlings freely because there are always more where
those came from.

## The Numbers

We only get a single stat block for klurichirs. They're Huge Elemental Humanoids
with the Demon tag, and Level 28 Soldiers with 258 HP. They have Blindsight 5,
and are immune to fear. Their ground speed is 8, and they fly at speed 12 with
clumsy maneuverability, meaning they fight on the ground.

Klurichirs project a **Malign Influence** aura (2) that prevents enemies inside
from regaining HP by any means. They fight with gigantic Reach 3 **axes** that
do more damage when the demon is bloodied and mark for a turn. They can make
occasional **Savage Hew** attacks (recharge 5+) that hit everyone in a Close
Burst 3 for the same damage and effects.

When a marked enemy moves, the klurichir can try to grab then with its Reach 2
**pincers** a reaction. This does some initial damage on a hit, and from that
point on the demon can spend minor actions to sustain the grab and deal the same
amount of damage automatically. Only one victim can be grabbed at a time.

When the klurichir is first bloodied, it speaks a **Blasphemous Utterance** that
deals necrotic damage and dazes (save ends) in a Close Blast 5.

## Final Impressions

Huh, it turns out klurichirs are actually a bit weaker than Balors, who are
Level 27 Elite Brutes. So I have a bit of a hard time believing the text that
says they're "on the cusp of becoming demon lords".

Maybe that also applies to balors, and you can reskin klurichirs into "baby
balors" wielding axes instead of the classic sword and whip combo. It's also
relatively easy to make klurichirs into elites via the usual rules.

Mechanically, I like the "no healz" aura and the pincers, which combine to put
grabbed PCs in a very unfortunate situation. Damaging a grabbed PC is a minor
action and the demon can still attack them with that high-damage axe.
