---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Human"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

As we saw in the Monster Manual Let's Read, Fourth Edition makes the usual D&D
human description a little more specific. They're the mortal people without a
patron deity, which makes their outlooks on life very varied and leaves extra
room in their hearts that can be filled with extreme dedication to any number of
causes. Therefore, humans can produce some of the world's greatest heroes as
well as its most depraved villains.

This MM2 entry brings us a huge grab bag of human stat blocks. Most of them are
the usual Unaligned people that can be repurposed as either allies or enemies,
but a few are Evil or Chaotic Evil and meant to always be used as threats.

Numbers-wise, they have absolutely no common traits beyond being Medium Natural
Humanoids with a ground speed of 6. You can easily take a human stat block and
make it into a member of another species by adding the relevant signature
ability to them (Goblin Tactics, Elven Accuracy, Savage Demise, Fey Step...).

## Human Cavalier

An armored knight that fights with lance and sword. It's highly recommended that
you give them a mount when building your encounters, though they can give a good
account of themselves on foot as well.

The Cavalier is a Level 7 Soldier (Leader) with 78 HP. Their basic attack is a
**sword** strike that damages and marks on a hit, and they can exploit the mark
with two different interrupt abilities. **Champion's Retort** is at-will and
allows the knight to make a slightly weaker attack against a marked enemy who
decides to ignore the mark. **Hasty Parry** is an encounter power that forces
the enemy to target the knight instead, and gives the knight a +3 AC bonus
against that attack.

When mounted, the knight can also attack with a **Lance** that damages and
knocks prone on a hit. The text doesn't say it can be used as part of a charge,
but it really should have this ability.

## Human Diabolist

A warlock-type who's in tight with the forces of Hell, and wields
fire-and-brimstone themed magic to achieve their Evil ends.

The diabolist is Level 20 Artillery with 147 HP, powerful enough to be
encountered alongside groups of high-end devils. Their main weapon and implement
is a **kukri** that does a mix of physical and fire damage. Like all attacks in
this book it needs a damage boost, but make sure its roll is still a fistful of
d6s because this attack has the Brutal property. This means you re-roll any dice
that show a 1 until they show something else.

Their attack magic is all about **Darkfire**, in an "at-will single-target" and
"area encounter power" versions. It does fire and necrotic damage, and the area
version also does ongoing fire and necrotic damage (save ends).

For enemies who get a bit closer, the diabolist can use a **Sulfurous Flash**
attack that deals fire damage and gives the caster concealment against the
target until the end of the caster's next turn. If attacked, the diabolist can
use **Infernal Deflection** (recharge 5+) as an interrupt to take half damage
from the attack and deal an automatic 15 fire damage to the attacker.

All of these attacks can be enhanced by **Hell Blight**, a minor action that
automatically makes an enemy in sight "blighted". If a blighted enemy takes fire
damage from the diabolist, they can't recover HP until the end of the
diabolist's next turn. The blight ends when the fight does, or when the
diabolist blights someone else.

Finally, the **Life From Fire** passive trait gives the diabolist 10 temporary
HP whenever they take fire damage from any source.

## Human Dire Beast Hunter

Someone has to protect all those scattered villages if no PCs are around to
help! This hunter is Level 9 Artillery with 76 HP, wielding a spear, a crossbow
with poisoned bolts, and a net.

The **net** is a Ranged 3 attack that does no damage and restrains (save
ends). The **crossbow** has good range and its bolts have an ongoing poison
damage (save ends) rider. The **spear** is there for emergencies, because its
best to hunt dire beasts from a distance.

The hunter is really not meant to be alone. It should be encountered either as
part of a sizable NPC hunting party, or attached to the PCs as an ally for a
particularly tough hunt.

## Human Dread Assassin

An epic-level assassin armed with a dreadful sword and with spells of poison and
darkness. The perfect person for the job when that job is to kill a king or
emperor. Though they're unaligned, their clientele is unlikely to be very nice.

The assassin is a Level 22 Lurker with 161 HP and a speed of 7. Their **Zealot's
Scimitar** is a High-Crit weapon that also deals ongoing poison and necrotic
damage (save ends). They can use a power named **Cloak of Zeal** as a move
action to shift 3 squares and gain concealment until the end of their next
turn.

While the assassin has cover or concealment, they can use **Deadly Blade**
(recharge 5+) as a minor action to make is so their next attack has combat
advantage and deals 5d6 extra damage on a hit. And finally, **Assassin's
Determination** triggers when they're bloodied and either immediately recharges
Deadly Blade or (if it's charged already) heals them for 20 HP.

I guess the idea is that this is a deadly foe that will never stop trying to
kill you until they succeed, but you should really boost their damage for that
to be true. Also, since they're regulars you should expect these epic ninjas to
work in groups.
