---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Lich"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Lichs are the original horrible undead wizards of D&D, having existed since
the beginning. They're both in the 4e Monster Manual and the Vault.

## The Lore

A lich is a spellcaster, usually a wizard or warlock, who has performed an
unspeakably evil ritual to become undead while retaining all of their intellect
and magical power. Several liches have been successful enough that their names
are known throughout existence. There's Vlaakith, the supreme ruler of the
githyanki; Acecerak, whose disembodied soul wanders the planes; and of course
Vecna, who became a god.

All liches are evil. In life, they were at the very least ambitious individuals
with an insatiable lust for both temporal and magical power. While someone can
technically possess these traits without being evil, the stuff they have to do
as part of the ritual, as well as the process itself, will inevitably warp their
alignment that way.

Most such greedy wizards become liches to cheat death. They start to search the
world and the planes for lore that allows them to piece together the ritual as
soon as they realize they're not going to live long enough to conquer the entire
universe. Sure, death is not the end in D&D, but it usually means losing your
stuff and for some wizards that's worse than oblivion. I imagine these
spellcasters make an effort to erase any knowledge of this ritual after they
find it to prevent future competition, but somehow the next lich candidate
always manages to find their own copy.

Liches are a lot more patient about their schemes than they were in life - they
now have the whole of eternity to work them. Their goal remains to accumulate as
much power and knowledge as possible, and now they have absolutely no moral
qualms about the methods used for this (if they ever had any before). Lots of
evil creatures serve liches willingly because they like to bask in their utter
depravity.

Liches tend to be security conscious (read: paranoid), because their immortal
forms can still be destroyed through violence. They'll rarely leave their
fortified lairs, sending lackeys to further their schemes when possible. A
Lich's soul is anchored in a phylactery, which is usually a tiny metal box
filled with arcane writings, but can also be any other small item. The
phylactery ensures a destroyed lich will re-materialize in a few days. The
security arrangements around phylacteries are even more elaborate and dangerous
than those around the lich itself, and can tell you a lot about the personality
of the lich in question.

Destroying a lich requires destroying the philactery first, and then the lich
itself. You have to be fast about it, because the lich can build itself another
philactery in a few days. Sometimes, not even this is enough: a powerful entity
associated with undeath such as Orcus or Vecna can call a destroyed lich back
into existence as a vestige. Orcus is the original architect of lichdom, and
nearly all liches are his agents in the end. I imagine this doesn't apply to
Vecna, and that the demon lord has competition in this area now.

Fifth Edition would add that liches need to regularly consume souls to keep
existing, but this is absent from the text here. Their all-consuming greed and
ambition is enough reason for them to keep inflicting evil upon the world.

## The Numbers

First off, we get stats for the Lich Transformation ritual! It's level 14,
requires training in Arcana or Religion, takes 1 hour, and costs 100,000gp in
components. A market price of 250,000gp for the formula is also listed because
that's the standard format for rituals, but this is definitely not something you
can find in most markets. Maybe there's a kiosk in Orcus' abyssal layer or
Vecna's domain that sells it, if you want to be cute about it.

Constructing the philactery is a separate process that takes 10 days - the 1
hour ritual casting time is just the final step that kills you and makes you a
lich. Phylacteries are tough, with 40hp and resist 20 to all damage. The cost
for the first one is included in the ritual's casting cost. Replacements take
another 10 days to build and cost 50,000gp. Feel free to include any amount of
baby-eating you require to mark this whole process (both building and casting)
as irredeemably evil.

On to the stat blocks!

### Lich (Human Necromancer) (MM)

Labeled "Lich (Human Necromancer)" in the MM, this is a Medium Natural Humanoid
(undead) and a Level 14 Elite Controller with 218 HP (MM). It has Speed 6,
Darkvision, Resist 10 Necrotic, and immunity to disease and poison. It also has
Regeneration 10, which can be turned off for a turn by radiant damage.

This lich surrounded by a **Necromantic Aura** with a radius of 5 squares, which
deals 5 necrotic damage to anyone caught inside. Against civilians with 1 HP,
this is a weapon of mass destruction all by itself, though few liches would be
murderous enough to use it in that way.

Its active powers are weird in that it entirely lacks a melee basic attack. This
is likely an editorial oversight. Instead it has a ranged basic attack named
**Shadow Ray** (Ranged 20 vs. Reflex) which does necrotic damage.

Every once in a while the lich can use **Frostburn** (Area Burst 2 Within 20
vs. Fortitude; recharge 5-6), which does cold and necrotic damage and creates a
zone that deals another 10 cold and necrotic damage to anyone caught
inside. This lasts a turn and can be sustained as a minor action.

A lich reduced to 0 HP will crumble to dust along with its possessions, and both
will reform adjacent to its phylactery in 1d10 days. This can be stopped by
destroying the phylactery.

Finally, it can use the Second Wind action to recover 54 HP and get +2 to
defenses for a turn.

### Lich Necromancer (MV)

The updated version of the messy lich above. This one is also a Level 14 Elite
Controller, with 268 HP and no Second Wind. It has the same speed, senses,
immunities, resistances and vulnerabilities but no regeneration.

The **Necromantic Aura** remains and works the same way, as does the
phylactery. Its active abilities are a lot more interesting.

The lich attacks in melee with a **Vampiric Touch** (vs. Fortitude) that deals
necrotic damage and heals the lich for the same amount. Its ranged attack is
**Freezing Claw** (Ranged 5 vs. Reflex; one or two creatures) that deals cold
and necrotic and immobilizes on a hit (save ends); on a miss, it does no damage
and slows (save ends).

Its big attack is **Enervating Tendrils** (Area Burst 1 within 10
vs. Fortitude), a tentacular explosion that deals a bunch of necrotic damage and
weakens on a hit (save ends). It deals half damage on a miss and recharges once
the lich is first bloodied.

As a move action it can use **Shadow Walk** once per encounter, teleporting
twice its speed.

As a minor action, it can use **Lich's Control** (Close Burst 10; recharge 5-6),
which targets one enemy suffering from a "save ends" effect and automatically
inflicts a -5 penalty on their next save.

If you need a level 14 lich, use this one and forget the one on the MM.

### Lich (Eladrin Wizard) (MM)

This is pretty much a level 24 version of the human necromancer lich. It's a
Level 24 Elite Controller with 262 HP and exactly the same passive traits,
speed, immunities, resistances, and so on. Even the numbers are the same.

Like its weaker counterpart, this lich lacks a melee attack. It attacks at range
with a **Shadow Ray** that does necrotic damage, and occasionally upgrades it to
a **Necrotic Orb** (recharge 5-6) that doe the same damage and also stuns for a
turn. Every once in a while it will cover an area with an **Entropic Pulse**
(Area Burst 2 vs. Reflex; recharge 5-6) that does necrotic damage.

The eladrin lich has the same phylactery mechanics and Second Wind, too.

### Lich Soulreaver (MV)

This one is a Level 22 Artillery lich with 156 HP. It has all the same senses,
speed, and resistances as the Lich Necromancer, though their numbers have been
increased to reflect an epic tier monster. The same happened with the Aura,
which now does 10 damage.

Soulreavers fight in melee with a **Vampiric Touch** that works like that of the
Necromancer but does more damage. They fight at range with **Dark Bolts**
(Ranged 20 vs. Reflex; 1 or 2 creatures) that do lightning and necrotic damage
and allow an ally adjacent to the target to shift 2 squares.

Twice an encounter they can cast **Black Flames** (Area Burst 2 within 10
vs. Reflex; enemies only) which does both immediate and ongoing fire and
necrotic damage while also making the target grant combat advantage (save ends
all). On a miss it still does half damage and slightly less ongoing damage (save
ends).

And finally, this lich can also Shadow Walk.

### Lich Remnant and Lich Vestige (Both)

These wispy, fragile things are what you get when Orcus or Vecna prevent a lich
from being entirely destroyed. Aside from level they're mostly
identical. Remnants (from the MV) are Level 16 Minion Artillery, and Vestiges
(from the MM) are level 26.

Remnants and vestiges fight in melee with a **Shadow Touch** and at range with a
**Shadow Ray**. They can also cast a **Orb of Obliteration** (Area Burst 1
within 10 vs. Reflex) at will, or alternatively use **Obliteration Empowerment**
on another remnant/vestige. This causes the orbs the ally uses on their next
turn to cover a larger area (+1) and do more damage (+5). Multiple uses of this
stack, so you could have a bunch of minion liches empower one single ally so it
can nuke the party.

The Vestige's powers work the same, but they're worded a bit differently.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The MM has two sample encounters, both Serious Business:

- Level 25: 1 eladrin lich, 2 great flameskulls, 2 soulspike devourers.

- Level 26: 6 lich vestiges, friggin' _Dorensain the Ghoul King_, 2 dread
  wraiths.

As you can see, liches surround themselves with all sorts of undead lackeys of
their own making. Constructs are probably very common as well, with summoned
elementals and demons being used as one-off muscle. I imagine devils wouldn't
appear very often, though. It's probably not uncommon for a powerful evil wizard
to sell their soul and renege on the deal by turning into a lich, so devils
would dislike liches on principle.

I imagine you could do a whole party of undead villains too: a lich, a death
knight, a vampire and so on.

Mechanically, you should ignore the liches from the Monster Manual and focus on
the ones from the Vault, which are much better designed. If you want to create
your own varieties, base them on the MV liches and their signature traits.
