---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Frog"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-frog.png" | absolute_url }}" width=800/>
  <figcaption>
    Not a D&D illustration.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Every individual roleplayer has a set of D&D monsters they consider "iconic",
regardless of what the publisher has to say about it. Years ago, I remember one
such player saying that to him "giant fucking frogs" were the most iconic D&D
monster. It's not D&D if you don't fight a huge-ass frog at some point.

By that criterion we can shut the grognards up for good now. Here is the moment
when 4e finally becomes D&D.

## The Lore

Real-world frogs are usually quite useful creatures. Most species are harmless
to humans and eat disease-spreading insects. Some consider them cute and, if
nothing else, they can be tasty when properly prepared.

In typical D&D fashion, this book calls such creatures "pests" because they're
not fuzzy wabbits. And then it moves on to focus on monstrous frogs, who are big
and aggressive enough to eat people. They live in surface swamps and on
underground lakes in "natural" caves or in the shallow Underdark. There are
several different species, and the book implies they're atavistic survivors from
the world's prehistory, like sharks and crocodiles in the real world.

A monstrous frog won't usually leave its home territory to hunt people, but it
will eat anyone foolish enough to wander through that territory. "Beware of
Frog" signs are a common sight in villages close to the borders of their
habitat. Frog attacks are a potential hazard for PCs traveling through marshy
terrain, and the book suggests they could be hired by a wealthy family to
retrieve some heirloom from the belly of a frog who ate its former bearer.

## The Monsters

All frogs shown here are Medium Natural Beasts, though you could probably
home-brew larger specimens if you want. They're Aquatic, which lets them breath
underwater and gives them bonuses against non-aquatic enemies in underwater
combat, and they have good Swim speeds and low-light vision.

### Thornskin Frog

These frogs have brown skin covered in thick spines. The spines are not
effective in combat but give them a distinctive look.

Thornskins are Level 1 Brutes with 35 HP. They have a ground speed of 4 and a
swim speed of 6. Their basic attack is a **bite** and they can also **pounce**
(recharge 5+). This lets them shift their speed, deald more damage than a bite
and knocks the target prone. As a minor action they can use a Reach 3 **Tongue
Grab** that pulls a target 2 squares on a hit.

In short, these critters do everything you could expect from a classic giant
frog.

### Sporeback Frog

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-sporeback.png" | absolute_url }}" width=800/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Sporebacks are the laziest hunters imaginable. They pick a spot and wait there
for prey to wander into the reach of their barbed tongues. They move so little
that mushrooms often grow on their backs.

Most creatures smart enough to pose a threat to these monsters have long since
learned to avoid them. As a result, sporebacks never expect their chosen prey to
put up a fight, and don't usually run away unless they're very close to death.

Sporebacks are Level 2 Controllers with 42 HP. Their ground speed is a pitiful
3, and their swim speed is 5. Their basic attack is a **bite** that damages and
slows, and their Reach 3 **Barbed Tongues** damage, pull the target 2 squares,
and knock it prone.

When they die, the mushrooms on their back burst and perform a **Spore
Release**, a close burst 2 attack that deals poison damage and inflicts a -2
attack penalty (save ends).

For extra nastiness, have the sporebacks in your encounter group stay
_underwater_ and use their tongues to drag PCs there. This works even better if
all of Team Monster has the Aquatic keyword.

### Murklord Frog

Murklords are entirely black, and have two parallel bio-luminescent stripes
running down their backs. These flare up when the frog is startled or feels
threatened.

These beautiful creatures are the opposite of sporebacks when it comes to
attacking prey. They perform darting strikes from the muddy margins of their
watery homes, and grow even more frantic and ferocious when wounded.

Murklords are Level 2 Skirmishers with 39 HP. They have ground and swim speeds
of 6. Their basic melee attack is a **bite** and they can also perform a
**Leapfrog** attack (recharge 4+) that deals more damage and allows them to
shift 3 squares both before and after making the attack. Perfect for leaping out
of the water, taking a bite, and returning before the PCs can react.

As a minor action, it can also perform a Reach 2 **Tongue Lash** that does no
damage but slides the target 1 square on a hit.

The murklord's attacks use d6s as their damage dice: 1d6+4 for the bite, 2d6+4
for the limited-use Leapfrog. After the frog is first bloodied, though, those
d6s become d12s, significantly increasing its damage potential.

## Encounters

Goblins, kobolds and bullywugs commonly employ trained monstrous frogs as mounts
and war beasts. Only the bullywugs have succeeded in _domesticating_ them,
though - the others must capture wild frogs and train those. When bullywugs make
alliances or trade agreements, they commonly make a gift of trained war frogs to
their new partners.

People with no access to trained frogs can still use them by keeping them
captive and releasing a bunch of angry half-starved frogs in the general
direction of the enemy.

## Final Impressions

I'm not sure if I'd go as far as calling huge-ass frogs "iconic D&D monsters",
but they _are_ cool. These ones are properly froggy in their mechanics, and you
can probably extend their usefulness by giving them additional levels,
increasing their size, and giving them a Swallow attack.
