---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Hydra"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Hydras are inspired by greek mythology, which as far as I know only had the
one. In D&D, I see them on the Rules Cyclopedia, which means they've been around
at least since the days of BECMI and probably since the beginning. They appear
in both books here.

## The Lore

A hydra is a giant reptilian monster, with a snake-like body and a number of
dragon-like heads. The first hydras sprang forth from the poisonous blood of
Bryakus, one of the most powerful primordials slain during the Dawn War. They
spread throughout the world and the planes and have thrived ever since. There
are many species of hydras, each with a different set of abilities and a
different number of heads. No species has less than four, though.

Hydras are nonsapient, but they're still extremely dangerous predators that
require a lot of food to survive. Most species are good swimmers, and though
they can't breathe underwater only one of the heads needs to surface to avoid
drowning. Hydras can survive on pretty much any environment as long as they have
access to food, though.

Despite their innate ferocity, hydras actually take quite well to training if
the trainer manages to survive the turbulent early stages of it. Giants,
minotaurs and powerful spellcasters are the most frequent hydra owners, though
sometimes a hydra will "adopt" someone more unexpected than that, like a goblin
leader.

The mythological Hydra was notorious for its ability to regrow its severed
heads, and here we have an interesting lore divergence between the two books:
the Monster Manual describes this as a persistent rumor that has so far proved
untrue; and the Monster Vault says it's true after all.

## The Numbers

Both books agree hydras are threats for the paragon tier and above. They also
give all hydras trained Perception, All-Around Vision, and Darkvision. Hydras
always have a swim speed unless it goes against the theme of their specific
abilities, though they're not Aquatic.

All hydras in both books have Threatening Reach, allowing them to make
opportunity attacks out to their full reach instead of just against adjacent
enemies. They also have the Many-Headed trait, which does different things in
each book. In the MM, it means that a stun or daze only causes the hydra to lose
one of its attacks on its next turn (though this stacks). In the MV, it means
the hydra can take free actions even while dazed or stunned, which is powerful
because "bite everyone in reach" is a free action for them.

The lore divergence above translates into a numbers divergence as well. MM
hydras have no head-severing mechanics at all, behaving like standard solo
monsters. MV hydras lose heads at 75%, 50%, and 25% HP, and grow two extra heads
to replace it the start of their next turn. This increases their number of
attacks, but skilled PCs might prevent it from happening.

### Hydra (MV)

The basic model is a Large Natural Beast with the Reptile and Water
keywords. It's also a Level 10 Solo Brute with 432 HP and the common traits
described above. Its land speed is 5, and it swim speed 10.

The hydra has four heads to start with, and it lose one at 324, 216, and 108
HP. Unless it takes fire or acid damage after losing a head, it will grow two
new ones on its next turn.

The hydra fights by biting, and its Reach 2 bites are kinda weak to make up for
the fact that there are so many of them. The Hydra Fury at-will attack allows it
to bite once per head it currently has, gaining a damage bonus if it only has 2
or 1 left. As an at-will free action, the hydra can use two bites against anyone
who ends their movement within reach of it.

### Fen Hydra (MM)

This is the basic hydra from the MM. It's a Large Natural Beast (repitile) with
all common traits for MM hydras. A Level 12 Solo Brute with 620 HP, it's
otherwise quite similar to the MV hydra, except it lacks a head-severing
mechanic. It has four heads throughout the whole fight, so its Hydra Fury always
allows it to make 4 attacks.

### Flamekiss Hydra (MV)

A fire-themed hydra, this is a Large Natural Beast (repitile) and a Level 12
Solo Brute with 496 HP. Flamekiss hydras have a land speed of 5 and no swim
speed, but also have Resist 10 Fire. They lose heads at 372, 248 and 124 HP, and
PCs can prevent them from growing more by dealing cold or acid damage before
their next turn starts.

Flamekiss hydras have the same attacks as the base model, plus Flame Kiss (Close
Blast 3 vs. Reflex) which deals immediate and ongoing fire damage (Flame
Ends). This recharges every time the hydra loses a head. It can be used in place
of a bite during a Hydra Fury combo, and benefits from the damage bonus if only
1 or 2 heads remain.

### Venom-Maw Hydra (MV)
