---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Genasi"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The concept of "people touched by the elements" is a 3e thing, but genasi as
presented in Fourth Edition are slightly different than what came before
them. They debuted in the Forgotten Realm Player's Guide as a playable option,
and would later appear in the MM2 in "monster" format.

## The Lore

In previous editions genasi were humans with "genie blood", but in Fourth
they're simply humanoid sapients from the Elemental Chaos. They're given no
cosmically significant origin story like tieflings or daeva, so I must assume
they simply evolved naturally in that plane.

Genasi look more or less human and have human proportions, but each of them also
has an _elemental manifestation_. The five known manifestations are "firesoul",
"watersoul", "windsoul", "stormsoul", and "earthsoul". Each genasi is born with
one of these and an individual's manifestation has more to do with their
environment than with genetics. A genasi community built inside a volcano is
going to have a lot of firesouls, and so on.

A genasi's manifestation accents their physical appearance and defines some of
their inborn powers and resistances. It's an always active part of their being,
not something they can turn off. Some of them train to manifest additional
manifestations. PCs can have two at most, but some NPCs can have more.

Genasi live primarily in the Elemental Chaos, where they have an easier time of
it than most other mortals but stil must step lightly around efreeti and the
like. They can also be found in the world or in the Feywild, since they don't
have any more difficulty living there than a human would.

## The Numbers

Genasi are Medium Elemental Humanoids, with a ground speed of 6. They tend to
have keywords corresponding to their elemental manifestations: a fire genasi
will have the Fire keyword, and so on. Their manifestation also determines what
elements they are resistant to, if any, and the themes of their powers. What
those powers are is mostly a function of training, so varies per stat block.

### Genasi Elemental Dervish

"I'm the Avatar, and you're gonna have to deal with it!" This is a genasi
warrior who has learned to manifest multiple elements, and trained extensively
with the double sword. They can move equally well on the ground, in the water,
or in the air. Their sword attacks can cause several different types of
elemental damage, as can their magic.

Elemental dervishes are Level 18 Elite Controllers with 344 HP and keywords for
the four "classic" elements (air, earth, fire, water). They have ground, swim,
and fly speeds of 6, and 10 resistance to cold, fire, and lightning damage.

At the start of its turn, the Dervish chooses an between fire, lightning and
thunder. Their **double sword** attacks will deal both immediate and ongoing
damage of that type. They can make two of those per action, being elites.

When a dervish is hit by an adjacent enemy, it can use its reaction to respond
with a **Fiery Riposte**, which targets Reflex and inflicts 10 ongoing fire
damage (save ends). If the enemy was already on fire, their existing ongoing
fire damage increases by 10 instead.

Their special attack is **Primordial Storm** (recharge 5+), which allows them to
shift 6 squares and perform three attacks in order against different targets at
any point along the movement. The first is **Promise of Storm**, which deals
thunder damage and makes the target Vulnerable 5 to thunder (save ends). The
second is **Earth Shock**, which deals physical damage and stuns for a turn. The
third and last one is **Lightning Cut**, which deals lightning damage and
inflicts 10 ongoing lightning damage.

The elemental dervish is flashy and awesome, and given enough time or
well-selected comrades they can set up some interesting elemental damage combos.

### Genasi Fireblade

A very straightfoward hot-headed warrior who charges into combat with a flaming
falchion. It's a Level 11 Brute with 139 HP.

The **falchion** it wields is a High-Crit weapon and inflicts ongoing fire
damage. It has the same Fiery Riposte as the dervish, dealing 5 ongoing damage
instead of 10. Its other power is **Fan The Flames** (Close Burst 1 vs. Reflex;
recharge 5+), which sets people on fire and gives them a -2 penalty to saves
against ongoing fire damage.

Fireblades are going to charge into combat, Fan the Flames, and then get to work
on cutting people up and setting them on fire at the same time.

### Genasy Hydromancer

AKA, a waterbender that's also partially made of water. This Level 8 Controller
has 91 HP, a swim speed of 8, and fights with a high-crit **Scimitar** and lots
of water powers.

The basic **Wave Bolt** (ranged 5) deals physical damage and slides targets 3
squares; **Whirling Vortex** (recharge 5+) does the same in a burst around the
hydromancer that affects only enemies; **Drowning Touch** inflicts ongoing
damage on a single target (save ends), but only recharges once the target saves
or drops to 0 HP.

The "partially made of water" bit is expressed by two other abilities: **Liquid
Body** is a reaction that allows them to take half damage from the triggering
attack, and **Swift Current** (encounter) allows them to shift their speed with
the ability to move through enemy spaces and basically ignore all terrain
effects while doing so.

### Genasi Skyspy

A windsoul genasi that fights with paired shortswords and uses their mobility
powers to enhance their hit and run tactics. They're a Level 7 Skirmisher with
78 HP and 5 cold resistance.

Their basic **short sword** attack allows them to shift 1 square on a hit, and
they can make two of those against an opponent granting them combat
advantage. **Feather-Footed** gives them an AC bonus against opportunity
attacks, and **Sky Jaunt** (recharge 4+) allows them to fly until the end of
their current turn.

Should the PCs manage to surround the skyspy, the genasi can use **Manifest
Whirlwind** (close burst 2; encounter) to do some damage, push them 1 square,
and knock them prone. This should help clear some space.

### Genasi Stoneshield

A heavily armored earthsoul warrior wielding a heavy pick in battle. It's a
Level 10 Soldier with 106 HP. Stoneshields are difficult to push around - any
forced movement applied to them is reduced by 1 square.

The **war pick** is a High Crit weapon, and it also marks on a hit. This mark is
remarkable for being (save ends) instead of only lasting a turn. Marked targets
take a -5 penalty to damage against the stoneshield's allies. They can also
attack with a **Mighty Bull Rush** that does the same damage as the pick and
pushes the target 1 square. It also allows the stoneshield to move into the
target's previous position.

Finally, they can stomp really hard and cause a non-damaging **Earth Shock**
(minor action; encounter) that covers a Close Burst 2 and knocks enemies prone
on a hit.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Genasi can be found alongside a large variety of other creatures, particularly
elementals. They're as morally varied as humans, so a villain could certainly
employ genasi henchpeople. We have three example encounters here:

- Level 8: 3 genasi skyspies riding hipogriff dreadmounts, accompanied by their
  pet shardstorm vortex elemental.

- Level 10: 2 fireblades, 2 stoneshields, and a trained magma strider.

- Level 19: Two storm archons (a squallshield and a tempest weaver) and two
  elemental dervish mercs.

Reading about genasi doesn't give me the sort of instant adventure inspiration
that some of the other monsters do, but I like that they exist. Their presence
in the Elemental Chaos gives you an excuse to place "normal everyday
communities" in that plane for your PCs to interact with. Not every EC
settlement is a githzerai monastery or the City of Brass.
