---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Belgoi"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

What do fey look like in a world whose environment as deeply fucked up as
Athas'? Let's check it out.

## The Lore

The Belgoi (singular and plural are the same) lived in the Feywild before it was
destroyed in ancient Athasian history, and they weren't the most pleasant of fey
back them. They came to hate the world and all its residents, and now live to
despoil everything they touch.

Belgoi organize into small nomadic tribes led by the strongest member. They'll
stop at a location and live there for a while, moving on when everything around
them is ruined, consumed, or polluted. They often go out hunting, and will eat
anything and anyone they can catch. In fact they prefer sapient victims because
they think meat tastes better when seasoned with terror, and that eating someone
lets them absorb the victim's power. That's why they also eat their own dead.

Eladrin are their preferred victims, since the belgoi blame them for the
destruction of their homelands.

Belgoi wear leather or hide armor, which I guess is true of most fighters on
Athas. They fight with claw or spear, and wield small bells which they use to
channel their magic. Ringing the bell allows them to lure targets closer for the
kill, isolating them from their peers and breaking their formations.

This makes me think their name is a horrible pun (belgoi == "bell guy").

Some of them have the ability to drain a victim's life force through the wounds
they inflict. You can see it seeping out and flowing into the creature.

## The Numbers

Belgois are Medium Fey Humanoids with Speed 6 and Low-Light Vision. They speak
Common, and all of the stat blocks here are Chaotic Evil. Their signature trait
is that they're **Hungry For Blood**, which makes all their attacks deal extra
damage against bloodied targets. All of them also have a bell-related power,
which is a little different for each variant.

### Belgoi Craven

The weakest and most cowardly of their number, hiding behind more powerful
warriors and waiting for the chance to pounce upon weak or isolated enemies.

These are Level 7 Minion Skirmishers, whose **Craven Slink** gives them a +2
bonus to all defenses when adjacent to an ally (even another craven). Their
**claw** is a standard minion basic attack, and their **Compelling Ring**
(ranged 10 vs. Will, Encounter) can slide the target 5 squares to a square
adjacent to the craven or one of their allies. Dangerous when the more powerful
variants are around!

### Belgoi Stalker

Not every belgoi belongs to a tribe. Stalkers usually travel alone, but can
sometimes join up with mixed humanoid bands that have similar inclinations. They
will also opportunistically insert themselves into ongoing fights, trying to
lure a victim out while they're busy with other enemies. And you can also just
say a given stalker is with a tribe too, of course. They're Level 7 Lurkers with
63 HP.

Stalkers will star the fight at a distance, and use the **Enticing Ring**
(Ranged 10 vs. Will) of their bells to lure a target. On a hit the target is
pulled 5 squares and dazed for a turn. The stalker then moves up and uses its
basic **Claw** attack, which deals light physical damage and ongoing 5 damage
(save ends). If the target is dazed, like they would be in this scenario, the
ongoing damage is increased to 15 and the _Stalker_ takes a -5 penalty to its
defenses until the start of its next turn, giving it an incentive to stay
away.

### Belgoi Hunter

Hunters are the main frontline units of a Belgoi attack, engaging enemies
directly with their spears and trying to make them vulnerable to the attacks of
their sneakier fellows. They're Level 8 Soldiers with 89 HP.

Hunters fight with their **spears**, but instead of charging into the fray
they'll try to draw enemies to them with the **Ringing Attraction** of their
bells. This minor action power attacks the Will of all enemies in a Close
Burst 5. On a hit, the hunter pulls the target 3 squares and marks it.

The hunter can then use its **Stakeout** attack against an enemy it has marked,
which deals the same damage as the basic spear strike and immobilizes the target
for a turn.

This set of powers is perfect for a tactic where hunters get the party's
defenders out of position so a large horde of cravens or a stalker can slip
through.

### Belgoi Caller

Callers usually lead belgoi tribes and hunting bands. They're visibly more
powerful than their followers, and have access to stronger magic and psychic
powers that help their allies and hinder their foes. Not every hunting band will
have a caller in it, but when they show up they're bad news. Callers are Level 8
Elite Controllers with the Leader tag and 178 HP.

They can fight with **Claws** that inflict ongoing 5 damage (save ends), but
their actions are better spent on their **Ennui Lash** power (minor action,
melee 3 vs. Will), which does equivalent psychic damage and inflicts a -2
penalty to Will for a turn. That opens the enemy up to their bigger powers, and
to the psychic attacks of their buddies.

The first big power is **Command of the Bell** (Ranged 10 vs. Will, recharge
4+), which deals psychic damage, slides the target 3 squares, and forces them to
make an at-will attack against an ally of the caller's choice. Not a basic
attack, an _at-will_ attack.

The other big power is **Distant Ringing** (area burst 3 within 10 vs. Will,
recharge when first bloodied), which deals psychic damage to enemies caught
inside and pulls them towards the center of the burst. Allies caught inside can
shift 1 square and roll a save.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

Encounters with groups of belgoi are pretty similar to the ones described for
the lone stalker above. They creep around the party trying to stay undetected
until their targets are vulnerable or engaged in another fight, try to lure and
kill as many victims as they can.

They'll use clever ambush tactics and take advantage of terrain as much as
possible, but don't seem to like surrendering or talking. They always begin with
the ambush, and run away if things don't go their way, possibly to return later
for revenge.

I like their mechanics, but I'll admit I can't get over the pun. Bell
guys. Sigh.
