---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Monster Vault: Dragons"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-dragon.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

"Of all the monsters in the world, dragons are the most feared". That's the
opening sentence for this large multi-entry. One could also say that of all the
D&D monsters in the real world, dragons are the most hyped.

They're in the game's title, of course, and have been a part of its bestiary
since the very beginning. And while dragons have indeed always been dangerous,
their stat blocks underwent a period of massive inflation starting with AD&D 2nd
Edition, when Ed Greenwood's extra-powerful Forgotten Realms dragons became the
standard.

In my experience, all of this seems to have had the opposite effect to what
previous designers intended. Dragons became so awesome in the minds of Game
Masters everywhere that most never really felt their groups were up to the
challenge. Though all campaigns had plenty of dungeons, many ended before a
single dragon appeared. I know mine did.

I have a whole lot more to write about that mindset, but this is not the article
for it. It suffices to say that the designers of Fourth Edition seemed to be
quite aware of this problem, and so took some steps to address it.

This article will talk about the lore and mechanics for 4e Dragons in generic
terms, and subsequent ones will look at each of the dragon varieties statted out
in the first Monster Manual and Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Like demons and devils, dragons also get a mythology sidebar in the Monster
Manual about their creation myth:

Way back at the dawn of time, there used to be a god named Io. Io was a badass,
and his arrogance was proportional to his badassitude. When the gods set about
creating mortal peoples in their image, Io created the dragons. He meant them to
be the pinnacle of mortal form (or at least that's what dragons say). The power
of the Elemental Chaos ran through their veins and surged from their breath, and
yet they possessed keen minds and refined spirits that tied them to the Astral
and the gods.

When the gods went to war agains the primordials, Io joined the effort but
scoffed at the idea of teaming up with his fellow deities. He challenged the
primordial Erek-Hus, called the King of Terror, to a duel. And the King of
Terror split Io clean in half with a titanic adamantine axe.

As soon as the two halves of the split god hit the floor, they each became a new
deity: the left half became Bahamut, and the right half Tiamat. The two new gods
teamed up and killed Erek-Hus. When the dust settled, they took a good look at
each other... and started fighting right then and there. For you see, each of
them had inherited half of Io's personality. Bahamut inherited his sense of
justice and desire to protect creation; Tiamat his arrogance, selfishness and
covetous nature.

The two fought so bitterly they ignored the pressing threat of the primordials
until Tiamat ran away from the duel. And even after that, they still weren't
great team players. I'm guessing Bahamut is a little better about that these
days.

Dragons come in a wide variety of types. Aside from the classic Chromatic and
Metallic varieties, the MM also mentions Catastrophic, Planar and Scourge
dragons (AKA Linnorms). We only get entries for the Chromatics in the first
Monster Manual and in the Vault. The other types are covered in other books or
in Dragon Magazine articles.

It makes sense for Chromatics to be first. Strongly associated with Tiamat,
they're common as dragons go and usually have the sort of foul disposition that
makes them highly likely to get into fights with PCs. There are five types of
chromatic dragon: white, black, green, blue and red, in order of
power. Chromatic dragons have few allies but lots of servants, from kobold to
dragonborn to fanatic cultists or other creatures that happen to share an
habitat with them.

While the stereotypical chromatic dragon is still evil, it's important to note
that this is no longer universally true. It's perfectly possible for an
unaligned or good chromatic dragon to exist, and for dragons of any aligment to
worship a non-draconic god (or none at all).

## The Numbers

Gone is the notion that dragons are "extra special" monsters whom only the most
elite of high-level adventurers can hope to fight. 4e dragons are still quite
powerful, being the edition's quintessential solo monsters, but now they span
the entire level range. If you want your party of early-Heroic PCs to fight a
dragon, they dang well should be able to fight a dragon. In fact, the PHB text
describing what PCs at the three tiers of play look like also has a description
of what the dragons they face look like at that tier.

Aside from color, dragons are also divided by age, with a smaller list of age
categories than in previous editions: Young -> Adult -> Elder -> Ancient. The
books contain a stat block for every combination of color and age category,
which all in all have you covered from early Heroic to mid-Epic levels.

The Monster Vault is even more spare here, containing stat blocks for Young and
Elder dragons of each color (with one exception). This makes sense if you
consider an Adult to be an up-leveled Young dragon, and an Ancient to be an
up-leveled Elder, though you'll have to do the leveling yourself.

As it happens with most solo monsters, if you want to use them to build a good
"boss battle" you'll want to use a dragon that's about 2 or 3 levels higher than
the party, or give a weaker dragon some lieutenants that bring the encounter up
to that level. Being MM1 monsters, our chromatic dragons lack much in the way of
multiple actions and are somewhat vulnerable to conditions that further limit
them, like dazing or domination. To counter these factors, the Monster Vault
versions of these dragons would gain Instinctive Actions, which happened
automatically at an initiative count 10 higher than what you rolled for the
dragon. They also gain an Action Recovery that allows them to automatically
recover from dazes, stuns, and domination at the end of their turns.
