---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Iron Dragon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Iron Dragons were bit players in 3e, appearing in Dragon Magazine #356 seemingly
as part of an effort to make a dragon for each element in the periodic table. In
4e, they are promoted to the Monster Manual 2 alongside adamantine dragons to
replace the bronze & brass duo that was removed.

## The Lore

Iron dragons are kind of the black sheep of the metallic family, since unlike
most of their relatives they're surly, anti-social, and underhanded. They lair
in isolated places and prefer terrain that contains plenty of hills, forests,
and other features that provide plenty of hiding spots for large predators such
as themselves.

They still gather followers and henchthings with the promise of generous pay
and/or loot, but they see those as expendable dupes. They'll send those
followers first to intercept any intruders, and will only join the fight
themselves if doing so looks like it will bring victory. If the hench-people are
severely outmatched, the dragon will get away and leave them to their fate.

As you might have gathered, iron dragons are sneaky and prefer to attack from
ambush. They breathe lightning, and their metallic scales become tougher the
older they get.

## The Numbers

Iron dragons are Solo Lurkers, and have Darkvision like all other
dragons. They're not actually very lurkery aside from a basic level of
sneakiness (Stealth training). Their abilities focus on damage mitigation with a
side order of control, all on top of the standard dragon loadout.

Young'uns start out Large, growing to Huge at Elder and Gargantuan at
Ancient. They have Resist Lightning 15, increasing by 5 per age category beyond
Young. Their speed starts out at 8 both in the ground and in the air, growing to
9/9 at Elder and 9/10 at Gargantuan.

### Young Iron Dragon

Young iron dragons are Level 5 with 268 HP. They have a **bite** that does a mix
of lightning and physical damage, and a **claw** that does about half that in
physical damage. The usual **Double Attack** allows them to claw twice, allowing
them to spread some damage around.

The **Breath Weapon** does lightning damage, as described earlier, and also
pulls 3 squares on a hit. Maybe it magnetizes the dragon for a moment?
**Bloodied Breath** and **Frightful Presence** are here and work as usual.

There's also **Wing Block**, an interrupt with triggers when the dragon is hit
by a melee attack. This gives the dragon Resist 5 against that attack, and
allows it to make a melee attack dealing light physical damage against the
attacker.

### Adult Iron Dragon

This one is Level 11 with 472 HP and all the traits of a youngster with bigger
numbers. No new abilities appear at this level.

### Elder Iron Dragon

Elders are Level 19 and have 740 HP. They have all of the adult's abilities,
again with bigger numbers all around. Their Double Attack turns into a **Triple
Attack**, allowing for three claw swipes with a single action.

They also gain **Wing Defense** (minor action; recharge 5-6), which grants the
dragon a +2 bonus to all defenses for a turn. As long as it keep recharging,
they can keep using it every turn.

### Ancient Iron Dragon

Ancients are Level 26 with 992 HP. They have all of the elder's abilities and
gain two new ones:

**Predator's Response** is a reaction that triggers when the dragon is hit by a
melee or close attack. It allows the dragon to make a claw attack against the
triggering enemy and shift 2 squares. I now notice the dragon's reach remains 2
even though it's now Gargantuan. Either their limbs and neck are comparatively
tiny, or you should increase the reach for the Elder to 3 and the Ancient to 4.

**Iron Wing Shroud** (minor action; recharge 6) allows them to make a close
burst 3 vs. AC attack dealing physical damage, and gain resist 15 to all damage
until the start of its next turn. While the damage resistance is active, the
dragon can't make any attacks. I guess this represents the dragon hiding behind
its wings and catching surrounding enemies in the movement.

The Shroud's "can't make attacks" clause is less of a disadvantage than it
seems - an ancient iron dragon can make all of its attacks for the turn and use
the Shroud ability as its last minor action. It will lose access to opportunity
attacks and Predator's Response, but will be able to act normally when its next
turn rolls around.

## Sample Encounters

We have two encounters:

- Level 7: A young iron dragon and 3 dwarf hammerers.

- Level 13: 1 adult iron dragon and 2 minotaur warriors.

Both of them would follow the standard pattern I described in the Lore section,
with the lackeys being mercenaries lured by the promise of treasure, only to be
abandoned by their boss when the fight begins to go sideways.

## Final Impressions

Iron dragons are the ones who least fit the classic metallic dragon stereotype,
which makes sense given their origins as an obscure magazine-only 3.x
dragon. Also I guess it's hard to make a draconic Lurker who doesn't sound shady
as fuck.

Still, I like that they're here. That shadiness is one point in favor of them as
far as their utility in a story goes.
