---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Battlebriar"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---

Today's monster is the Battlebriar, a plant creature that's entirely new to
me. It exists only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

Battlebriars are weaponized biotech! These plant monsters were created to serve
as living siege engines. A direct quote from the book: "They can destroy massed
formations of lesser troops, stor defended embankments, or bring down
fortifications."

Being plants, these living engines of destruction are surprisingly
low-maintenance. As long as a battlebriar has access to water, fertile soil and
sunlight, it can live forever. This makes them good guardians in addition to
being siege weapons. Fey creatures like to use them as guardians for their
strongholds. Other battlebriar users include Hill Giants, which I found quite
interesting. Sometimes they also escape their masters and go live in the wild.

Battlebriars are Unaligned and have Int 3, so PCs are most likely to fight them
when going against their masters. A wild battlebriar will likely leave the PCs
alone if they don't provoke it, though of course they might have no alternative
if it's blocking their goal.

## The Numbers

We're given two stat blocks for these things.

The **Warthorn Battlebriar** is a Large natural animate (plant), and a Level 14
Controller with 141 HP and a ground speed of 6. It has an aura of Grasping
Thorns, with a 2-square radius, that makes its area difficult terrain for
enemies and deals 5 damage to any that start their turns there. This thing has
dozens of branches constantly flailing around!

Those branches can also fire their thorns in a close burst 2, dealing damage an
slowing targets for a turn. Furthermore, its claw attacks pull victims towards
the monster. Getting away from this thing is quite hard: you're slowed, in
difficult terrain, and when you manage to get away it pulls you back. It also
has threatening Reach, and so can make opportunity out to its full reach of 2
squares/10 feet.

Its big brother is the **Earthrager Battlebriar**, a Huge elemental animate
(plant). It's a Level 28 Elite Brute with 634 HP, a ground speed of 8 and a
_burrow_ speed of 6. It's made out of vines rather than thorny brambles, so its
3-square aura pulls enemies towards it. It's the claws that do the slowing. It
also has threatening reach, and it can trample - that last bit is how it attacks
several characters at once.

It resembles the Tarrasque in its tactics when on the offensive. When used as a
guardian, it burrows and uses tremorsense to detect intruders, erupting below
them to fight.

The suggested encounter is level 14, a Warthorn being used as a weapon by a
party of 2 cyclopes and 3 hill giants.


## Final Impressions

Living siege engines are always cool, and these are nicely thematic for fey or
elemental Earth-themed opposition. I liked them. Like every other MM monster,
they need the damage fix, but other than that I see no fault with them. I like
that their abilities match their in-world roles. The warthorn is your infantry
killer, and the Earthrager with its burrowing and trampling ability makes short
work of castles and walls.
