---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Skeleton"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-archons-skeleton.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
     Illustration by Adam Gilespie. Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

The first Monster Manual already included [plenty of skeletons][2], so this time
we just get a couple more of them. The basic lore remains the same and you can
see it in the link above.

## Bonecrusher Skeleton

A Large-sized skeleton that used to belong to an ogre, minotaur, oni, or similar
creature. Not having to haul all that flesh around makes it surprisingly fast
for its size.

This is a Large Natural Animate with the Undead keyword, and a Level 7 Soldier
with 80 HP. It has all usual skeleton traits: darkvision, immunity to disease
and poison, resist 10 necrotic, vulnerable 5 radiant. It runs at speed 8.

The skeleton wields a Reach 2 **greatclub**, and it can use it to perform a
**Crushing Blow** (reach 2; recharge 6+) that does more damage and knocks the
target prone. Its superb agility is expressed as **Threatening Reach 2**.

## Skeletal Steed

A horse skeleton that can act as a fearless and tireless mount, proving that
mundane horses truly suck in 4e. Even a dead horse is better mount than a live
one.

Skeletal horses are Level 3 Skirmishers with 47 HP, darkvision, and immunity to
disease and poison. They don't have resistance to necrotic damage or
vulnerability to radiant damage. Their ground speed of 8 and their fearless,
untiring nature make them highly desired as mounts by people who don't mind the
whole skeleton thing.

If forced to fight the skeletal steed uses **kicks** like a normal horse, and
they can also perform them as part of a **Mobile Melee Attack**. You know the
drill on this one: the steed moves its speed, makes an attack at any point along
the way, and doesn't draw opportunity attacks. It can also emit a **Death
Shriek** (fear; close burst 3; recharge 5+) that does no damage and inflicts a
-2 attack penalty (save ends).

When used as a mount, the steed allows its rider to join in on the Mobile Melee
Attack. Either the rider makes a basic attack while still allowing the steed to
kick, or the steed gives up its attack to allow the rider to use a non-basic
power.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

These new skeleton types rise in much the same way as the other ones. Most often
it's because a necromancer intentionally animates them, but sometimes a freak
accident with necrotic energy can cause them to rise up as well. In such cases,
skeletal steeds tend to rise along with their former riders.

We get two sample encounters here:

- Level 5: 1 deathlock wight and 2 standard wights riding skeletal
  steeds. Ancient horsemen riding again.

- Level 6: 1 orc eye of Gruumsh plus a zombie hulk and three bonecrusher
  skeletons. Orc necromancer and his undead ogres.



[2]: {{ "/2020/12/13/skeleton.html" | relative_url }}
