---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Monster Manual/Vault: Ooze"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Jellies, slimes, molds, puddings. Collectively known as "oozes", these are
likely the most iconic D&D monsters not exempted from the OGL. Talk about
dragons all you want, but I'll bet you far more adventuring parties have faced
(and died to) some kind of ooze than they did dragons. They've been in the game
since the beginning, and their variety has only increased as time went on. Here
they're present in both books.

## The Lore

Talking about "oozes" is like talking about "animals". There's so many types
that you can't really describe them as a whole in anything but the most general
terms. They're goopy, they're mindless, they like damp and/or dark places, and
they eat just about any type of organic matter by dissolving it with their
acidic secretions.

As far as the inhabitants of 4e's implied setting are concerned, oozes are just
a fact of life, like animals or plants. They're natural creatures that have been
around forever and everyone knows they exist. Learning how to keep your basement
or root cellar ooze-free is probably a basic life skill.

The most sensible advice for any regular person who spots an ooze is to turn
around and leave. This is complicated by the fact that sometimes these creatures
wait in ambush. Also, adventurers are neither regular nor sensible, and they
like to delve into exactly the sort of place oozes thrive in, so they end up
running into these creatures much more often than civilians.

Oozes are drawn to heat and movement, so they often try to eat living creatures,
but they don't have a preference for them over any other organic matter and can
subsist on dungeon crud just as well. Finding an unusually clean room or
corridor is a sure sign that you're approaching an ooze lair.

In addition to the no doubt large variety of natural species, these things are
also quite likely to form as the result of botched magical experiments, or to
spontaneously form in piles of magical waste. They're even easy to _summon_, so
your PCs might end up fighting them when they go up against a particular sort of
wizard.

## The Numbers

Oozes are Natural Beasts of varying size, with the Blind and Ooze keywords. They
always have some sort of blindsight or tremorsense they use to perceive their
surroundings.

The Monster Vault adds an **Ooze** trait that all of its versions have, which
allows them to ignore all penalties for squeezing. Normally, while a character
squeezes past an opening smaller than themselves, they move at half speed, grant
combat advantage, and attack at a -5 penalty. Oozes ignore all of that. I think
the Ooze keyword implies the same rules for the MM oozes, it's just less
explicit.

### Ochre Jelly (Both)

This Large ooze is a Level 3 Elite Brute with 102 HP and 5 acid resistance. It
crawls at speed 4, and the MV also gives it a climb speed of 4.

Both versions attack with pseudopod **Slams** that do physical damage and
ongoing acid damage (save ends). As a move action they can use **Flowing Form**
to shift their speed, which means they pretty much never make normal moves. I
think their Ooze trait also means they can squeeze between adventurers if the
party surrounds them but leaves a small gap.

When first bloodied, an ochre jelly **Splits** into two jellies with half the
original's HP. So a jelly that hits exactly 51 HP would split into 25 and 26 HP
halves. Both of these individuals act independently, and the new one doesn't
have any of the conditions that applied to the original.

If the fight ends with the two jellies alive (e.g., if the PCs ran away or
died), they eventually recombine.

A pair of ochre jellies makes a nice mini-boss fight for level 1 adventurers!
And you could easily make higher level versions that start out Huge and split
more often to challenge more powerful parties.

### Green Slime (MV)

Green Slimes split the difference between a monster and a hazard, with different
editions treating them in different ways. Here, they're monsters.

These green, runny slimes are Medium Level 4 Lurkers with 47 HP. They have 5
acid resistance and 5 vulnerability to both fire and radiant damage. Their basic
**slams** target Reflex and do 5 immediate and 5 ongoing acid damage (save
ends), which is notable because it's a flat amount and not a damage roll.

They also have a special **Engulf** attack that also targets Reflex, does a bit
of immediate acid damage, and initiates a grab with escape DC 18. This is the 4e
version of the classic "a green slime drops on you from the ceiling" attack, so
it will likely be made with combat advantage due to surprise. Until the target
escapes the grab, they take 10 ongoing acid damage (a lot at heroic tier), and
any attacks against the slime deal half damage to the monster and half to the
victim.

This is not quite as bad as the "you're dead in 1d4 rounds" of the old-school
version, but if an unlucky level 1 adventurer runs into one of these the result
will be pretty much the same.

### Gelatinous Cube (Both)

Ridiculous, or ridiculously awesome? These Large translucent oozes are shaped
like 10-foot cubes, fitting precisely in any Gygax-standard dungeon
corridor. They're Level 5 Elite Brutes with 156 HP, who crawl along at a ground
or climb speed of 3.

In addition to the Ooze trait, they are **Translucent**, which makes them
invisible until they're spotted (a DC 25 Perception check!) or until they
attack. I think it's still true that they can't digest metal or bone, so even if
you fail to spot the cube you might still see a floating pile of coins, a
skeleton, or a suit of armor. That's not exactly a disadvantage: watch as the
impetuous barbarian or paladin charges the foul "construct" or "undead" and
walks right into the cube!

If you fail to spot the cube and walk (or charge!) into it, you're automatically
hit by its **Engulf** attack and sucked into its corrosive and anesthetic
insides. This is a grab, and a grabbed victim is dazed and takes 10 ongoing acid
damage until they escape (DC 15 in the MV, 16-18 in the MM).

Gelatinous cubes can also be more proactive in chasing their meals! Once the
fight is joined, it will attack with **Slams** (Melee 1 vs. Fortitude) that deal
acid damage and immobilize (save ends), and make active Engulf attempts (Melee 1
vs. Reflex).

Gelatinous cubes are still exactly as much fun as they were in older
editions. Aside from the corridor, "pile of treasure" or "skeleton" setups, you
can also put them at the bottom of pit traps and the like.

### Black Pudding (MV)

The top of the food chain when it comes to classic oozes. This is a Large, Level
8 Elite Brute with 218 HP and 15 acid resistance. Their ground speed is 4, their
climb speed 3.

Black puddings are super-aggressive. The pudding's **Slams** do quite a bit of
acid damage, and the thing can shift up to its speed before or after the
attack. They're more like lunges than slams.

The pudding can also **engulf** (close blast 3 vs. Fortitude), which does the
same damage as a slam to everyone in the area and grabs them (DC 16). The
pudding can them use a standard action to **melt** one of its grabbed victims,
dealing a nice chunk of automatic acid damage and eating a healing surge. If the
victim has no healing surges left, they take 10 extra acid damage instead.

Defense-wise, black puddings are less of a puzzle monster than they used to be,
but they still retain some of that in their **Split** trait. When they're hit by
a weapon attack, a piece of them splits off and becomes a Black Pudding Spawn in
an adjacent square.

Spawn are Medium Level 8 Minion Brutes whose slams have the same "shift your
speed" rider as their parent's and do minion-level acid damage. There is _no
limit_ to how many spawns may be in play at any given time, so the party is
going to be in for a nasty surprise if they have a Twin Strike ranger or are
all-martial.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Being dumber than even mundane insects, oozes don't "ally" with anyone. Still,
some creatures might keep them in a convenient corner of their lair to deter
intruders, or they might join an ongoing fight as opportunistic predators. And
of course, as the lore text said you can have a wizard with Pokemon trainer
aspirations summon oozes and direct them through magic.

The sample encounter covers the first case: level 3, 1 ochre jelly and 3 orc
raiders.

This is another instance where you lose nothing by ignoring the Monster Manual
entries and going all in on the Vault's versions. They have almost the full set
of classic oozes, and despite the many attempts by 3e to prove otherwise,
they're enough for the vast majority of campaigns. It's not D&D if it doesn't
have some icky goo in it somewhere.
