---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Thri-Kreen"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Thri-Kreen got famous as one of the playable options for AD&D's Dark Sun. This
is their 4e debut. They would return as fully-supported playable characters in
the 4e Dark Sun Campaign Setting, about 3 months after the publication of the
MM3.

## The Lore

Thri-Kreen are mostly-humanoid sapient insects, adapted to live in arid
climes. They're all over the Dark Sun setting, but even in this more generic
version their preferred habitats are deserts and arid wastelands.

Thri-Kreen tradition says they were created by the great primal spirit known to
them as Sand Father, and to other species as Old Grandfather. Sand Father looked
at the deserts of the world and found them too empty for his taste. So he
plucked a species of sand beetle from the world and made them into the first
thri-kreen. Realizing that size and strenght would not be enough to guarantee
their survival, Sand Father also gave them the wisdom of the lizard and the
cunning of the desert fox.

In the distant past, the thri-keen managed to form a large empire that spanned
many of the world's deserts, a nation known as Val-Karri. It lasted for a
hundred years before it was subjugated and assimilated by the dragonborn empire
of Arkhosia. The thri-kreen recovered their freedom when Arkhosia fell, and
returned to a nomadic lifestyle.

Modern-day thri-kreen regard people who live outside the desert as weak, for
only those tested by the sands are worthy of respect. Though they draw no maps
or formal borders of their desert territories, they guard those territories
fiercely and are quite harsh to interlopers who try to pass through without
paying homage to them first.

As long as these protocols are observed, thri-kreen are content to leave other
to their business and to go about their own. They're very well adapted to their
chosen habitat and don't need to raid neighbors for resources or anything like
that. Thri-kreen communities tend to be small and nomadic, and might go for
years without meeting other sapients. They display good aptitude for primal
magic and psionic powers, and are often good allies to any druids and wardens
that also make the desert their home. Thri-kreen villains are usually in service
to evil primal spirits, demons, or other groups who corrupt and transform the
land to suit their own foul purposes.

## The Numbers

Thri-kreen are Medium Natural Humanoids with a ground speed of 7 or 8 and
low-light vision. Their signature ability is the **Mantis Jump**, an encounter
power which allows it to jump a number of squares equal to its speed without
provoking opportunity attacks. Most stat blocks here combine martial training
with minor psionic powers.

### Thri-Kreen Ambusher

These are young adults who spent their childhoods learning about the land and,
upon coming of age, are cast out of their tribe to survive alone for a
year. They travel widely to hone their skills, and their extended periods of
solitude also allow them to develop their latent psionic powers.

Ambushers are Level 6 Lurkers with 58 HP and a Speed of 8. They fight with two
**spears** in melee and with a **Mind Stab** power at range. The power deals
light psychic damage and dazes for a turn.

They can also use a **Spinning Spears** maneuver. This deals about half the
damage of a basic attack, but also gives them a +5 bonus to all defenses for a
turn and recharges their **Psionic Boost** ability. This one allows them to add
extra psychic damage to a Spear or Mind Stab attack after it hits.

So yeah, this is a lurker who doesn't hide. It will alternate boosted Spear/Mind
Stab attacks with Spinning Spear. It's still pretty good at hiding as well,
which is why it's called an Ambusher.


### Thri-Kreen Scout

Scouts keep watch over their territories and can stand still for hours under the
blazing sun while doing so. They warn the rest of the group when they spot an
intruder, and are cautious to engage them, preparing traps in advance. If a
direct fight starts, they're frenetic combatants.

Scouts are Level 7 Skirmishers with 80 HP and Speed 8. They fight with
**Spears** and **Shuriken**, and can perform **Leaping Attacks** to move their
speed and make a stronger spear attack at any point during the move.

If hit by an attack, they can use **Sudden Recoil** to shift 1 square away as a
reaction. If the attack bloodies them, they can shift 4 squares instead. They
also have a **Psionic Boost** power similar to that of the Ambusher, though this
one recharges automatically on a 5+.

Scouts will alternate boosted basic attacks with Leaping Attacks, and will
probably have traps lying around the battlefield if they were expecting
company.

### Thri-Kreen Desert Talker

This is a primal spellcaster with powers over the desert sands. They tend to act
as judges in thri-kreen communities, trying those who break their laws and
customs and punishing the guilty. The most severe punishments are execution and
exile to the desert, but I imagine there are smaller ones for lesser offences.

Sand Talkers fight with their bare **claws** and throw **shurikens**, but they
also have a couple of sand-bending spells for use in combat. **Shifting Dune
Rend** (area 1 within 10 vs. Reflex) deals no damage, but knocks prone on a hit
and slides 2 squares as an effect. **Desert Tempest** (close blast 5) deals
minor physical damage, pushes 2 squares, and blinds (save ends). It recharges
when the thri-kreen is bloodied.

All of this pushing around synergizes with **Sand Trap**, a minor action that
allows it to create three of the things within 10 squares. When an enemy starts
their turn in a sand trap square, they are restrained for a turn, and then the
sand trap disappears. The power recharges when there are no sand traps left in
the field.

Desert talkers are good for breaking up PC formations and setting things up for
their allies, which is exactly what they'll spend the first few rounds
doing. Their special attacks do very little damage, but their basic ones are
okay and a good choice once all the PCs are good and restrained.

## Final Impression

I love thri-kreen! Whether they're from Athas or not, I find their look
extremely interesting, and I also liked that this generic version of their
culture does not make them universally hostile.
