---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Nagpa"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Back in 1982, there was a movie named _The Dark Crystal_. It introduced these
cool villainous vulture people called the Skeksis, which became kind of
iconic. D&D wanted in on some of that action, so it added a species called the
Nagpa to Mystara. Nagpas are to Skeksis what Halflings are to Hobbits, which
means that they started out just barely different enough to avoid a lawsuit and
got significantly changed in each subsequent edition. This is their 4e debut.

## The Lore

Once upon a time, during the Dawn War, the Primordials realized they needed
servitors that could act as special forces. They already commanded uncountable
hordes of elementals, but they were mostly dumb as rocks and only good as shock
troops. Giants and djinns were smart and individually powerful, but too few in
number.

So they decided to take a page from the playbook of the gods and create a
servitor species they named the nagpas. Created to be as beautiful as nymphs and
as clever as devils, the nagpas readily took to their new role and proceeded to
wreak havoc on the armies of the gods for a time.

However, when the Dawn War was nearing its end, the nagpas were clever enough to
realize that their side would lose. And so it was that they made a deal with the
gods to betray their masters. However, they were caught, and the primordials
cursed them.

The curse took away the beauty of the nagpas, turning them into horrid
vulture-like beings. It also doomed them to never touch that which they desired
the most. A nagpa who loved fine food and wine would always taste foulness when
he tried to eat or drink. One who loved art would see it crumble at a touch.

Nagpas were either already immortal, or were made so by the curse. Even when
slain, they reincarnate within a few decades with all memories of their previous
lives and deaths. Every nagpa alive today remembers their life before the curse,
and is obsessed with those things it cannot have. They tend to destroy mirrors
or any other surface that can show them their own faces.

The primordial curse angle is interesting. Without it, you could argue that
their vulture-like appearance is a subjective thing. Some people think they're
ugly, they themselves like it just fine. But a curse might make them
"axiomatically" ugly: not only are others unable to see beauty in them, they are
incapable of seeing it in themselves.

## The Monsters

Nagpas are Medium Elemental Humanoids with Low-Light Vision and a speed
of 6. Everything else comes from training and varies per stat block. The two
stat blocks here have a wizardly bent, and use magic with a corruption and decay
theme.

### Nagpa Corruptor

The Nagpa Corruptor is given as an example of an art-loving nagpa. Its lair
looks like a museum, with cordoned-off works of art on display (but no
reflective surfaces!). It employs a large number with a similarly evil
disposition to protect its collection and acquire more pieces for it.

Corruptors are Level 9 Controllers with 97 HP. Their basic attacks are a
**withering staff** that deals necrotic damage and pushes 2 squares, and a
ranged **Withering Blast** that deals necrotic damage and immobilizes (save
ends).

They can also use a ranged **Devouring Fire** (recharge 5+) spell that deals
fire damage and ongoing fire damage (save ends). Each failed save also deals a
bit of fire damage to up to 3 enemies adjacent to the target. The text says
"each ally" but I'm interpreting that to mean "each ally of the target".

Their strongest attack is an encounter power named **Corrupting Curse**, a close
blast 5 that deals necrotic damage and creates a zone that prevents enemies
inside from regaining HP. It lasts until the end of the encounter. Their other
encounter power is an **Enervating Blast**. It's another close blast 5 that can
be cast as a minor action, deals no damage and weakens those it hits for a turn.

Corruptors let their hired muscle do most of the fighting, hitting their enemies
with opportunistic spells from afar. They're one of the rare monsters that
include more specific "director's notes" in their text, though: if the fight
happens inside the corruptor's lair/gallery, PCs should be able to its beloved
art objects. The first time one is destroyed, the corruptor becomes dazed for a
turn.

### Nagpa Carrion Lord

This one is a gourmand who loved good food and drink, but who can only taste
ashes and filth now. It still likes holding feasts, but its inability to enjoy
them fill it with rage and frustration.
