---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Iliyanbruen Guardian"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Okay, so back in Olden Times there was an elven empire named Illefarn that
reached as far as the North. Over the course of history this empire broke up
into three successor states. The one that covered our current region of interest
was named Iliyanbruen. This is important because if you get the two confused the
surviving eladrin of Iliyanbruen will tut-tut at you.

You see, when Netheril's magic winked out, one of their floating islands fell on
the Neverwinter Wood. This was a disaster for both the humans living on the
island and the nation of Iliyanbruen that happened to be beneath it. Many of its
inhabitants decided to call it quits and move to Evermeet, which means more or
less leaving the world behind for good. Others decided to try and preserve their
culture, and enacted a ritual to move their capital city of Shandarar to the
Feywild.

Their new home was anything but safe, though, as a lot of the same beings who
had driven the original elves away from the Feywild at the dawn of time were
still there and they didn't like the arrival of these invaders one bit. After a
period of strife, though, the elves managed to re-establish their nation there.

Iliyanbruen still exists in the modern day, its borders a ways away from the
place where Shandarar used to be. With the coming of the Spellplague, the world
and the Feywild began to enter in conjunction, which made the crossing once
again possible. After a lengthy battle to drive a covey of hags away from
Shandarar, the eladrin managed to send scouts and explorers though to the
world.

As a side note, I don't know if the people of Iliyanbruen became eladrin after
millennia of living in the Feywild or if they were already a type of elf that
got recast as eladrin when the editions changed. We'll be looking into some of
those later.

Anyway, upon arriving at the world, the eladrin of Iliyanbruen were horrified to
learn the old ruins of their empire were not only in a state of disrepair but
had also been looted and plundered. They were quite mad about it. You leave your
stuff lying around for a mere three thousand years and these uppity mortals
think they can come and take it. What an outrage!

The eladrin of New Shandarar began debating what to do and soon fell into two
distinct camps. One faction wants to invade the world in force and rain
vengeance upon anyone who lingers near the ruins of Iliyanbruen (i.e, everyone
in our regional map). The other also wants to restore the old cities to their
glory, but only wants to take revenge on the people directly responsible for the
thefts. This does require learning who these people are.

The PC is one of the investigators responsible for finding this out. They helped
retake Sharandar from the hags, were among the first to arrive on the world, and
decided to make it their home as they try to reconstruct the history of the
ruins and find the thieves. They belong to the moderate faction, and as the
campaign starts they're getting desperate for results because the firebrands
back home are about to win the debate. They need concrete results, and fast, if
the world is to avoid an eladrin invasion.

Even worse, the main obstacle to their investigation isn't the ludicrously large
time scale. No, it seems there's someone out there actively trying to prevent
eladrin investigators from finding anything out, usually by murdering them. It's
dangerous to go alone.

This theme is open to eladrin PCs of any class. Not all inhabitants of modern
Iliyanbruen are eladrin, but all of the features and powers here are aimed at
powering up their Fey Step.

## Features

At level 1, PC can take one adjacent ally with them when they use Fey Step. The
ally also appears adjacent to the PC.

At level 5, they gain a +2 power bonus to History and Nature checks.

At level 10, they can use Fey Step as a minor action instead of a move
action.


## Optional Powers

Most of these are yet more teleport-related power-ups.

**Blink Away** is a level 2 encounter power that lets the PC teleport 2 squares
as a reaction to an enemy ending their turn adjacent to the PC.

**Evasive Step** is a level 6 daily power that lets then use Fey Step as an
interrupt if an enemy attacks them while Fey Step is unexpended.

**Feywild Will** is a level 10 daily power that gives the PC a +2 power bonus to
Will and to saving throws until the end of the encounter. Whenever the PC
succeeds at a save while this is active, they gain 5 + WIS Modifier temporary
HP.

## Impressions

Peeking ahead a bit I see Forgotten Realms' Moon and Sun elves are eladrin
variants in 4e. I remember they were both huge assholes, so it's not a surprise
the eladrin of Iliyanbruen are just as unpleasant even if they're only their
distant relatives.

Most other PCs would be very interested in preventing an invasion from
Iliyanbruen from adding to their troubles, so they're natural allies of the
moderate Guardian. And this is another one of those themes that easily supports
multiple PCs, or even a whole mono-theme party (it's a _team_ of
investigators). Such a party would be mostly uninterested in Neverwinter's
political woes, except where they intersect with their quest.

If you want to optimize for the ability to do Teleport Shenanigans, this is the
theme for you. Little could stop a whole party of them from getting to where
they want to go.
