---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Scion of Shadow"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

I've mentioned the Netherese several times already, and now it's time to view
the theme most directly connected to them.

Okay, so we know that there was this ancient human empire named Netheril, that
it was ruled by archmages, and that it really liked building flying islands. We
also know that it fell overnight due to Shenanigans that caused its signature
magic to stop working and caused all of those islands to fall from the sky. And
we've also seen (spoilers!) that one of these islands fell in the Neverwinter
Wood.

Now, I think that either in the 4e FR book or somewhere near the end of third
edition, you had this metaplot event where the survivors of ancient Netheril
started coming back. Turns out one of their island cities survived the fall by
crossing over into the Shadowfell, much like the eladrin did with the
Feywild. They spent all this time there, and were mutated by the plane's
energies. Now they're returning to the world bent on ruling it again, and are
engaged in sinister conspiracies the world over. These people consider
themselves heirs to Netheril and call themselves Shadovar.

And sure enough, there are Shadovar in the Neverwinter Wood, trying to repair
the old Netherese flying city that crashed there.

If you're a PC with this theme, you used to be one of them. Your early education
contained a lot of fascist drivel about how the Netherese were superior to all
other peoples of the world, and how they were going to reclaim their rightful
place at the top of the societal food chain once they returned. You were
assigned a post in the first scouting expeditions into the world, and fell in
love with all the warmth and sunlight you saw there. You also interacted with
plenty of supposedly "inferior" people that quickly dispelled the bullshit put
into your head by the Shadovar leadership.

You volunteered for a post at the location farthest from the center of Shadovar
power - Neverwinter. You managed to vanish shortly after arriving here, and now
live in the city, keeping your past a secret. But lately you've been seeing
signs and hearing rumors that tell you the Shadovar presence here is only
increasing. The only thing that would get them this riled up is a repairable
flying city. If there really is one here (spoiler: there is) and they manage to
make it fly, then this could become a new major center for the Shadovar, and
you'd never escape their shadow again. You need to stop them, if only to ensure
you can live a peaceful life here.

There are no class restrictions for this theme, but Scions of Shadow can only
be one of human, shadar-kai, or shade. Those last two represent whose bloodlines
were affected by the Shadowfell, or who were mutated directly. I think
Shadar-kai get a full playable treatment in the Gloomwrougth supplement, and
Shades appear in Heroes of Shadow. Even Shadovar humans are edgier than usual.

The associated background skills are Arcana, Bluff, and Stealth.

## Features

The features here are all about your heritage brings you closer to the shadows,
even though you have chosen the light.

At level 1 you gain **Eyes of Night**. This daily power gives you Blindsight 10
for a turn when used.

At level 5, your healing surge value increases by 4 wherever you're in dim light
or darkness.

At level 10, you gain a +2 power bonus to Bluff and Stealth checks.

## Utility Powers

More shadow magic!

**Flitting Shadow** is a level 2 encounter power that can be used when you
reappear at the end of a teleport. Shadar-kai get a racial teleport power, and
warlocks can often teleport as tell. The power makes you assume a shadow form
for a turn. This gives you Insubstantial, Phasing and Vulnerable 5 Radiant, and
lets you make checks to hide when you have partial cover or concealment,
including from your allies.

**Binding Shade** is a level 6 encounter power that can be used after you hit
with an attack. After the attack is fully resolved, you gain partial concealment
and combat advantage against its target until the end of your next turn.

**Dancing Shadows** is a level 10 daily power that lets you teleport 6 squares
when used. Until the end of the encounter, you can teleport 3 squares at will
with a move action. In all cases, you must appear in a square of dim light or
darkness.

## Impression

Very edgy. The Level 5 feature and Level 10 power are awesome in a party that
doesn't need bright light to operate.

The Shadovar/Netherese are a little less horrible than the Red Wizards, but only
a little. I wonder if you can capture their restored flying island and use it to
fight the finished Thayan fortress in a giant robot battle.
