---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Specter"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Specters have been in the game since the beginning, and here they're only on the
Monster Manual.

## The Lore

When I talked about ghosts, I mentioned that every single synonym for that word
used to be its own entirely separate type of incorporeal undead, and that 4e
consolidated that a bit but not entirely. Specters are one of the undead that
retained their own entry.

Specters are incorporeal undead that can form "naturally" when an evil murderer
or other equally depraved villain dies. Unlike a ghost, they don't retain any
memory of their life, and aren't bound to a particular location. However,
they're just as evil as they always were, and their new hatred of the living
ensures they keep looking for new people to kill.

Specters tend to cling to other equally malevolent undead, and will sometimes
ally with a living being who is as evil and murderous as they are for as long as
new victims keep coming.

## The Numbers

Specters are Medium Shadow Humanoid with the Undead keyword. They have
darkvision as well as both the **insubstantial** and **phasing** traits, meaning
they take half damage from most sources and can pass through solid
surfaces. Their HP is a bit lower than their level would indicate, so being
insubstantial doesn't make fights last that much longer.

As undead, they're immune to disease and poison and have some degree of necrotic
resistance and radiant vulnerability. They have no ground speed, but they fly,
and it's not like you can force a specter to land.

### Specter

The basic model is a Level 4 Lurker with 30 HP and all the traits mentioned
above. It flies at speed 6, has 10 necrotic resistance, and 5 radiant
vulnerability.

The specter has a **Spectral Chill** aura (1), which inflicts a -2 penalty to all
enemy defenses. It attacks with a **Spectral Touch** that targets Reflex and
does necrotic damage. It can also unleash a **Spectral Barrage** (close burst 2
vs. Will) which does psychic damage and knocks prone. This is likely some sort
of scary illusion.

As a standard action, the specter can become **invisible** until it attacks or
is hit by an attack. It will likely alternate between attacking from
invisibility, and retreating while invisible.

### Voidsoul Specter

This is either the specter of someone really evil, or a basic model that has
grown bloated through years of post-mortem murder. It's a Level 23 Lurker with
115 HP. Its necrotic resistance increases to 30, and its radiant vulnerability
to 10.

**Spectral Touch** works the same with bigger numbers. The **Spectral Chill**
aura is stronger, dealing 10 cold damage to enemies caught inside in addition to
inflicting the same -2 defense penalty. Its special attack is **Life Siphon**
(Close Blast 5 vs. Fortitude; encounter) which deals necrotic damage and makes
the specter heal 5 HP for every target damaged by it. Finally, its
**invisibility** works the same but becomes a 1/round minor action instead of a
standard one.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter has a basic specter, a deathlock wight, and a bunch of
zombies and skeletons.

Specters feel to me like one of those monsters that should have been rolled into
the "Ghost" entry. They don't have much to distinguish them from ghosts or from
wraiths (the other surviving synomym). I'd guess that's why they didn't make the
Monster Vault.
