---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Clan Bloodspear"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This is an original and Vale-specific entry using classic monsters (orcs, in
this case).

## The Lore

Clan Bloodspear is a large clan of orcs who make their home in the Stonemarch, a
desolate region to the northwest of the Nentir Vale, separated from it by the
Cairngorm Peaks. From what I understand, they're pretty well adapted to it and
don't really need to raid their neighbors for resources. However, Gruumsh still
exerts his divine influence to make sure they form a huge horde and ravage the
surrounding lands about once every century.

The clan was founded by the eponymous King Bloodspear, who in the distant past
slew the elder dragon Kulkozsar in single combat and made a throne of his
skull. The glory from his deed attracted many followers, and they made the
dragon's former lair into an entire underground city that kept being expanded
and improved over time. In our narrative present it includes multiple forges,
arenas, and slave pens. Their technology and production base is significantly
higher than that of other orc clans, though they still rely on slave labor to
power a lot of it.

The last time the Bloodspear marched forth was ninety years ago, when they
attacked Nentir Vale and practically erased the civilizations within it. The
land and its inhabitants have yet to fully recover from that attack, and yet it
seems they're getting ready to do it again. Gruumsh has selected a new champion
among the Bloodspear, and that champion is hard at work in forging them into an
invading army.

In an uncharacteristic move for the patriarchal Bloodspear, this new champion is
a woman: Queen Msuga. She's an extremely formidable warrior and general, and has
defeated enough challengers to her legitimacy that all of them now accept her
rule. Msuga is always accompanied by her sister Rohka, who is also known as the
Blood Witch. As a high priest of Gruumsh, she commands vast mystical powers
despite her withered body. Some rumors say Rohka is the true power behind the
throne and Msuga is just a puppet. Whatever the truth is, it's clear the two
sisters are united in purpose.

And this purpose is an ambitious one: the sisters are preparing not to simply
raid the Nentir Vale, but to conquer and annex it as part of their nascent
Bloodspear Empire.

In addition to their powerful leaders and their large numbers of combat-ready
orcs, Clan Bloodspear also contains a small but significant percentage of
individuals of mixed orc and troll or ogre descent. The book described this as a
"breeding program" overseen by Rohka and calls the results "vile half-breeds",
but I don't like this language at all and would probably explain it as a natural
consequence of them sharing space with ogres and trolls over on the Stonemarch.

## The Numbers

Clan Bloodspear would mostly be made up of orcs fitting the standard profiles
listed on the Monster Vault, but they also have some combat traditions that are
unique to them. We also get stat blocks for the half-troll and half-ogre
(ogrillon) members of the clan. You could conceivably add full-blooded ogres and
trolls to their numbers as well.

As a reminder, orcs are Medium Natural Humanoids with a speed of 6 and Low-light
vision. Their signature trait is **Savage Demise**, which lets them take a
standard action for free when they hit 0 HP. Some of the stat blocks here play
with that standard template a bit, and I'll point out when they do so.

### Bloodspear Grenadier

The Bloodspear like their explosives! Grenadiers are Level 4 Artillery with 44
HP. They carry 2 **handaxes** to fight in melee or to throw, and 4 **fire
bombs** that act as area burst 1 attacks and deal fire damage. Once per
encounter when an enemy ends their movement adjacent to the grenadier, they can
shift 2 squares and drop a load of **caltrops** in a close blast 3 pattern. This
creates a zone that damages anyone who enters it or ends its turn inside.

Grenadiers replace Savage Demise with **Blazing Fury**, which deals 5 fire
damage to all adjacent creatures and lets them throw a fire bomb for free.

I guess if these grenadiers manage to use up all of their ammo, they'll
probably retreat from the fight, since the Bloodspear are supposed to be a
well-coordinated and more disciplined force than your standard orc band. You
might want to add a feature like a supply cart to the battlefield that would
allow them to reload, and would also be very flammable.

### Bloodspear Krull

Krulls are named after a famous 80s fantasy movie that featured a weapon called
a Glaive, because they are Bloodspear martial artists who specialize in
glaives. That's it. That's the joke.

The "glaive" from the movie was a cool throwing star thing, but the weapon
Bloodspear Krulls use is the equally cool _real_ glaive, a polearm with a
single-edged sword blade at the end. They're Level 5 Brutes with 78 HP.

The **glaive** can be used to make strong Reach 2 basic attacks, and it can also
be used in a **Charging Sweep** (recharge 6+) maneuver. This is a Close Burst 2
attack that deals the same damage as a basic attack, pushes targets it hits 1
square, and knocks them prone. As the name implies, it can be used as part of a
charge.

When the krull bloodies an enemy, its **Frenzied Strike** ability allows it to
make a free extra attack against that enemy. And when they drop to 0 HP, their
**Charging Demise** ability lets them recharge and immediately use Charging
Sweep one last time.

### Bloodspear Ogrillon

Orgillons are half-orc/half-ogres. They're smaller and smarter than a full ogre,
and almost as strong. These are Level 5 Elite Brutes with 156 HP.

Orgillons fight bare-handed. Their **slams** do strong physical damage, and do
bonus damage against prone targets. On a critical hit, they knock the target
prone as well. As elites they can make **Double Attacks**. They lack a Demise
ability, but their **Brutish Retaliation** allows them to use a slam against an
enemy in reach that hits them with a random or area attack as a reaction. This
sounds a bit redundant when these attacks already provoke opportunity attacks,
but it at least lets the ogrillon save their opportunity action to attack
someone else. Or to hit the offender again when they try to move away after
landing that attack.

### Bloodspear Shiv

Skilled knife-fighters, shivs are Level 6 Skirmishers with 75 HP. They carry no
less than 12 **daggers**, which can be used in melee or thrown. Their **Shifting
Shank** ability lets them shift their speed and make a dagger attack at any
point during the movement. If this attack bloodies the target, they can make a
second free attack against that target.

They have the standard **Savage Demise** ability as well.

### Bloodspear Half-Troll

Like ogrillons, half-trolls are smaller and smarter than their troll parent, and
almost as strong. They also retain the infamous trollish regeneration
abilities. They are Level 8 Soldiers with 92 HP.

Half trolls have Regeneration 5 and Troll Healing, which lets them rise again
with 11 HP a turn after they drop. Acid or fire damage can prevent them from
healing for a turn, and can prevent them from rising.

The half-troll's **claws** damage and grab on a hit (escape DC 16), and it can
grab up to two creatures at once. If a grabbed creature attacks the half-troll
or escapes the grab, the half-troll can **bite** them as a reaction, an attack
that deals light physical damage. It also has the standard version of Savage
Demise, which could potentially trigger several times during the battle if the
PCs are too slow with their acid and fire.

### Bloodspear Savage Throng

A large unit of orcs with an unfortunate name, for use during the late Heroic
tier. It's a Huge Swarm of Medium Natural Humanoids, and a Level 9 Brute with
117 HP. It follows all the standard swarm rules: half damage from single-target
attacks, 10 extra damage from area attacks, can occupy the same space as other
characters, and can move through any opening big enough for a single Medium
creature.

The throng's **swarm attack** aura (1) is relatively weak, inflicting only 4
damage on anyone caught inside. As it also occupies the swarm's own spaces,
though, it covers plenty of squares. Its basic attack is a **Mob of Swinging
Axes**, and once per encounter it can pull off a **Savage Frenzy** that attacks
every enemy in a Clost Burst 1, doing half damage on a miss. As with the aura,
the burst should also catch anyone who is inside the swarm.

Once at the start and once when first bloodied, the throng can make a
**Trample** maneuver, which works as usual: move their speed and make an attack
against any enemy whose space they move through. The attack deals physical
damage and knocks prone.

### Queen Msuga

Msuga is a Level 10 Elite Soldier with the Leader keyword and 212 HP. Her usual
speed of 6 becomes 8 when she charges. If the PCs fight her, she will surely be
alongside her sister Rohka and a sizable honor guard.

Msuga's **greataxe** marks the target for a turn on a hit, and she can perform a
**Sweeping Blade** (recharge 5+) maneuver that attacks every enemy in a Close
Burst 1 for more damage than a basic attack, and even more against bloodied
enemies. This also marks everyone it hits for a turn.

As a minor action, she can use **Furious Onslaught** to order an ally within 10
squares to charge or make a basic attack as a free action. If a marked enemy
within 5 squares makes an attack that doesn't target her, she can shift 5
squares to make a greataxe attack aggainst the offender as a reaction.

When Msuga drops to 0 HP, **Queen's Demise** allows her or an ally within 10
squares to use a standard action for free.

### Rohka the Blood Witch

As mentioned above, Rohka is most likely to be found alongside her sister Msuga,
and accompanied by a sizable honor guard besides. She is a Level 10 Elite
Controller with 216 HP. She has the usual ground speed of 6 and an effective
teleport speed of 10.

Rohka fights in melee with her **claws**, but she prefers to stay at range and
fling spells. Her go-to is **Chaos Displacement**, an area burst attack that
targets Fortitude, deals psychic damage, and slides targets 3 squares. Every so
often she can use the **Baleful Eye of Gruumsh** (recharge 5+), which targets 1
or 2 creatures and attacks Will. A hit deals psychic damage and slows (save
ends). After the first failed save this worsens to immobilization, and after the
second failure the target is dominated instead.

If someone hits Rohka with a melee or ranged attack and an ally is nearby, she
can use **I Need a Volunteer** (encounter) to teleport and swap places with the
ally as an interrupt, making the attack target the ally instead of her. This
does mean the attack could _miss_ the ally if their defenses are higher. She
also has the standard version of Savage Demise.

## Final Impressions

Overall I like this portrayal of Clan Bloodspear. They make a solid choice for
opposition because they're ambitious and highly militarized imperialists with a
penchant for enslaving others. Combining the stat blocks from this entry with
the standard orc stats in the MV gives you enough opposition to last you the
whole Heroic tier. The book still uses the word "savage" a little too often for
my tastes, and there's the "vile half-breeds" thing, but I intend to change this
if I ever use them in a game.
