---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Vault 2: Demons, Part 04"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---


{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-demon-yochlol.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

This is the last post covering the "Demons" entry in the Monster Manual 2, and
it features a lone demon: the Yochlol, who has been in the game since at least
AD&D 1st Edition.

## The Lore

Yochlols are the handmaidens of Lolth, being some of her most favored
servants. This a fact which those not initiated in Her mysteries will find
baffling because yochlols don't resemble spiders in any way. In their natural
form these demons look like pillars of snot with a baleful red eye embedded near
the top. They can also take the shape of beautiful drow women.

Yochlols might be assigned by their mistress to assist mortal priests that have
also earned her favor, but they mainly works as spies. They're so good at
passing for mortal drow that they can remain undetected for years at a time and
attain positions of great power in their society. I'll write more about the
implications of this in the Impressions section.

The existence of yochlols is one more point in favor of my pet theory that Lolth
is actually a demon lord.

## The Numbers

We get a single stat block here, named Yochlol Tempter, which I guess is
representative of most of them.

Yochlols are Medium Elemental Humanoids with the Demon and Shapechanger
keywords. They're Level 17 Controllers with 158 HP. Despite being demons, they
lack Variable Resistance and have Resist 10 Poison instead. They have
darkvision, a ground speed of 6, and a climb speed of 8 with Spider Climb.

Yochlols have two sets of attack powers, one for when they're in demon form, the
other for when they're in drow form. They can **switch forms** with a minor
action, but I guess an infiltrated yochlol will stick to drow form to avoid
blowing its cover. Once that happens, though, it will change shape as often as
it needs to assemble the best combos it can.

In demon form, the Tempter fights with its Reach 2 **Tentacles**. A basic
tentacle attack is quite weak, but the demon can make four of them with its
**Amorphous Flurry**. If two or more flurry attacks hit the same target, that
target takes a -4 penalty to Will (save ends).

At range, it can project a **Maddening Web** (area burst 2 within 10
vs. Reflex). It does no immediate damage, but immobilizes and deals 5 ongoing
damage (save ends). It recharges on a 4-6, but only while the yochlol is
bloodied. So it's less of a web and more of flung ball of runny snot.

In drow form, this demon's attacks are all what you would expect out of a
priestess of Lolth: a **spider touch** in melee that also deals ongoing 10
poison damage (save ends); a **venom bolt** (ranged 10 vs. Reflex) that deals
physical and ongoing 5 poison damage (save ends); and a minor-action **Seductive
Glare** which despite the horrible name is a slow-acting mind control spell
(ranged 10 vs. Will). On a hit the target is dazed (save ends); the first failed
save worsens that to Stunned, and the second to Dominated. In all cases a
successful save ends the effect.

## Sample Encounters

The sample encounter is level 16 and as you would expect involves a lot of drow:
2 arachnomancers, 1 blademaster and a priest, accompanied by 2 yochlol
tempters. Your call as to whether the drow know about the demons or not.

## Final Impressions

Mechanically, I find yochlols quite interesting with their two forms that have
complimentary powers. A lone yochlol can set up some interesting combos by
itself, by using Amorphous Flurry to weaken someone's Will and then the mind
control attack in the next round. If you have two of them, they can do that a
lot faster.

I remember seeing complains in Let's Reads for older editions about how these
demons don't seem to have much to do with Lolth thematically speaking. After
all, spiders are officially Her Thing and yochlols are not spiders. And despite
them being described as the ultimate shape-shifting spies, they can only turn
into drow, so they can't be used to spy on the drow's enemies.

The bits of lore here help make sense of all that. Lolth is also the goddess of
lies, and treachery is among her commandments. How much do you think such a
deity would trust their followers? No, Yochlols aren't made to spy on the
enemies of the drow. They're made to spy _on the drow_. Their un-spider-like
nature gives Lolth some plausible deniability. It is, perhaps, a hint that these
demons are the product of another side of Lolth's personality, one rarely known
to her worshippers. Because despite all the dedication the drow people lavishes
on her, Lolth doesn't trust them.

That's kinda tragic, for both the Drow and for Lolth.
