---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Arcanian"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I don't remember seeing arcanians anywhere else before, though they do have that
"late-3e feeling" to them.

## The Lore

Wizardry is a craft that demands great patience and care. While a warlock
"cheats" by making shady deals with dubious entities, a wizard earns every bit
of power they have. But some wizards have less than great patience and care, and
try to reach a bit too far beyond their current ability.

In the vast majority of cases that just results in an embarrassing fizzle, but
sometimes the magic goes out of control and causes a major accident. Most of
_those_ end up turning the caster into a messy stain on the floor, but some are
worse.

In these rare cases, the wizard absorbs most of the runaway magic, which kills
them and animates the corpse. The resulting entity is known as an Arcanian. Its
sapient and highly intelligent, but utterly consumed by whatever strong emotion
the wizard felt as they died, further warped by the nature of the magic that
killed them.

## The Monsters

Arcanians are Medium Natural Humanoids (Undead). Each is themed around an
element and an emotion, though ironically they have no particular resistance
against their own theme element. They have a ground speed of 6 and no special
senses. They also carry wizardly implements that give them abilities similar to
that of a PC wizard.

Their signature ability is **Arcane Surge**, an encounter power that triggers
when they hit an enemy with an implement power (anything but their basic melee
attack). It makes that power deal maximum damage.

### Green Arcanian

Green Arcanians are half-melted monstrosities. Acid seeps from their pores, and
their footsteps leave seared footprints. Their driven by envy and a hatred of
beauty, which they use acid magic to destroy.

Green Arcanians are Level 8 Artillery with 67 HP. All of their attacks deal acid
damage. Their basic melee attack is an **Acid Touch**, and their basic ranged
attack an **Acid Bolt** that also deals a bit of splash damage to enemies
adjacent to the target. Less often they can cast a **Stream of Acid** (recharge
5+) that does heavy damage and inflicts a -2 AC penalty and 5 ongoing acid
damage (save ends both).

Their implement power is **Orb of Denial**, an interrupt which triggers when an
enemy succeeds on a save and makes them fail the save instead. Thankfully this
is an encounter power.

### Blue Arcanian

This shivering corpse despises warmth, and believes that people and things can
remain forever perfect if they're frozen. As you might imagine, it goes around
attempting to preserve everything it likes.

Blue Arcanians are Level 10 Controllers with 105 HP. They move slightly slower
than normal at Speed 5, and all of their powers deal cold damage.

Their basic melee attack is a **Frost Staff** that also pushes 2 squares and
immobilizes for a turn. They fight at range with at-will **Bolts of Frost** that
turn the area surrounding the target into difficult terrain for a turn, and once
per encounter they can summon a **Swirling Blizzard** to deal damage over an
area (half on a miss).

Their implement power is **Staff of Shielding**, which once per encounter gives
them +4 to all defenses against an attack.

### Red Arcanian

These eternally burning undead are gripped in the throes of fiery passion or
red-hot wrath. They want to burn the world and take great pleasure in doing so.

Red Arcanians are considerably more powerful than the rest: Level 19 Artillery
with 131 HP. All of their attacks deal fire damage, and they carry wands.

Their melee basic attack is a **Fiery Touch**, and their ranged spells will be
familiar to PC wizards: **Scorching Burst** is an at-will area attack, and
**Burning Hands** is an encounter power that hits a close blast 5 that deals
heavy damage and pushes 3 squares.

Their implement encounter power is **Wand of Accuracy**, which gives them a +4
bonus to their next attack.

## Final Impression

Just because liches are the most iconic undead wizards, it doesn't mean they're
the only ones. Arcanians seem like a good monster to use when you want to make
an adventure themed around wizards who dug too deep.

You could have a whole ruined academy filled with a variety of them and with
other supporting undead or summoned extra-planar monsters. It's easy enough to
change the ruling element of the stat blocks presented here, or to adjust their
level so you can have all three in the same dungeon. Maybe there's a tome or
artifact in its vaults that the party must recover, or maybe it's just a place
they need to pass through on their perilous journey.

Sprinkle in journal entries that hint at the disaster that destroyed the place,
and add a big lich with multiple elemental attacks as the "end boss". And there
you have it, an instant Dark Souls level for your 4e table.
