---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Mammoth"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Cribbing from paleonthology is one of the classic ways to add interesting
monsters to your D&D world. Dinosaurs are the obvious choice, but there's also a
bunch of post-dinosaur megafauna that can be slotted in with no problem at
all. Among that set, mammoths are some of the most famous.

Looks like the Monster Manual 2 only had one page to dedicate to them, though,
so it decided to skip mundane mammoths altogether and give us a fantastical
variety.

## Nyfellar Mammoth

These creatures are native to Nyfell, the same frozen realm in the Elemental
Chaos from which frost giants originally came. They're partially made of ice,
and subsist on a combination of organic food and ice, so they thrive in the most
inhospitable frozen hells.

Frost giants have long ago tamed Nyfellar mammoths for use as mounts, and were
responsible for bringing them to the world, where they can still be seen filling
that role. I imagine it's also possible to find wild specimens.

Nyfellar Mammoths are Huge Elemental Beasts with the Mount keyword, and Level 17
Brutes with 202 HP. They have Resist Cold 10 and a respectable ground speed of 8
with Ice Walk, which allows them to ignore "icy" difficult terrain.

They also possess the same **Icebound Footing** trait that's common among frost
giants, reducing any forced movement inflicted on them by 2 squares, and getting
a free save to avoid being knocked prone. They fight with their tusks and big
feet in combat.

The tusks are Reach 2 and can either **gore** as a basic attack or perform a
**Tusk Toss** (recharge 4+) that targets Fortitude, does a little less damage
and slides the target 5 squares. At the end of the slide the target falls from a
height of 30 feed on the destination square, so it really is a toss. The fall
does damage (and can be mitigated) according to the standard rules for falling.

The feet can **stamp**, a Reach 1 attack that targets fortitude, does about same
damage as a gore, and knocks prone. The mammoth can also execute a **Blizzard
Trample** maneuver to move 8 squares, go through enemy spaces, and stamp each of
those enemies. This recharges when the mammoth is bloodied, or when it takes
cold damage.

If used as a mount, the mammoth can employ a **Bitterwind Charge**, which allows
it to use a Tusk Toss _or a Blizzard Trample_ when charging. Yeah, it moves 8
squares then tramples for another 8 in a single standard action. After this
special attack concludes, the rider gets to make a free melee basic attack.


## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is a level 17 frost giant patrol, with 2 giants riding
nyfellar mammoths and accompanied by a rimefire griffon acting as a spotter. The
book notes that giants like to play badminton with PCs by readying actions to
attack victims of Tusk Toss as they fly by.

These ice mammoths are pretty cool, and I can see why they preferred to include
them over the mundane variety. They have a good synergy with frost giants, which
also debut in this book.

You could pretty easily derive a mundane mammoth from the nyfellar stat block,
making it level 10-13 and removing some of the more blatant elemental
abilities. Maybe they could be used as hill giant or ogre mounts then.
