---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Brohg"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

This entry goes on and on about how stupid brohgs are, but I think that's
terribly unfair to them. They're some of the nicest people we've met in this
reading so far.

These four-armed giant-kin wander the wastes in small nomadic bands that
occasionally cross paths to trade gossip and partners. They're extremely skilled
at surviving the environment in Athas, taking only what they need and leaving
little trace of their passage. Their strong primal magic tradition helps them
with this.

Of course, being both big and relatively peaceful makes them frequent targets
for the many odious slaver organizations in this setting, so they often end up
captured and put to work as heavy laborers, muscle, or gladiators. Enslaved
brohg who manage to break free often seek employment as mercenaries.

Brohgs have both an innate ability to sense arcane magic, and an intense
cultural distrust of it, as they associate all arcane magic with defiling and
believe it to be cursed. Very rarely, a brohg will be born with innate arcane
potential (like a PC sorcerer). These individuals end up exiled from their
communities, as they're believed to be hosts to "evil spirits" and destined to
bring disaster. Left to fend for themselves with no support, they often end up
creating a self-fulfilling prophecy scenario and becoming cruel defilers.

## The Numbers

Brohgs are Large Natural Humanoids with the Giant tag. They move at a relatively
slow speed of 6, and have low-light vision. They have four arms and are
ambidexterous, but that doesn't translate into a specific trait in their stat
blocks - each one has different abilities related to training.

### Brohg Hurler

Hurlers are civilians without a lot of combat training, but they get by just
fine by throwing stuff really far away, be that stuff boulders or
enemies. They're Level 10 Artillery with 82 HP.

Their basic Reach 2 **Slam** attack lets them grab the target on a hit, which is
hilarious because they can then use **Hurl Away** to throw them 10 squares at
another creature, further damaging the "ammunition" as an effect and making a
ranged attack against the second target. For rules purposes, this counts as a
push that leaves the hurled creature adjacent to the second target.

If no one's stupid enough to get within arm's reach of a hurler, they can hurl a
**rock** instead, which does similar damage, pushes the target 2 squares, and
knocks it prone.

### Brohg Warrior

This is what a trained brohg combatant looks like. When a brohg community is
under attack, warriors step up to cover their retreat. This could also represent
an enslaved or mercenary brohg working for someone else. Warriors are armed with
2 spears, a shield, and a hand kept free to throw rocks. They're Level 10 Elite
Soldiers with 212 HP.

They can attack with a **spear** that marks for a turn or a thrown **rock** that
knocks prone, and **Double Attack** lets them do that twice in an action in any
combination.

Their **Brohg Taunt** ability is a minor action that lets them mark everyone in
a Close Burst 2, and recharges when they're bloodied. If a marked enemy within 2
squares moves, the brohg can use **Battle Alacrity** to get a free attack on
them that does light damage and lets then shift 1 square.

### Brohg Renegade

One of those banished sorcerers who went all in on defiling magic, and now
wanders alone or at the head of a villainous band, plotting to increase his
power. The Renegade is a Level 13 Solo Controller with 512 HP.

This defiler knows an **Arcane Secret** that lets them roll saves against daze
or stun effects both at the start and end of its turn, even if that effect
doesn't allow a save (i.e., by having a fixed duration instead). Its **dagger**
basic attack is a _minor_ action that does normal damage, and a little bit of
extra force damage if the target doesn't end their next turn at least two
squares away from the renegade.

Its standard actions are all spells.

- **Entropy Belt** (ranged 10 vs. will) targets one to three creatures, dealing
  psychic damage and pushing 3 squares on a hit.

- **Defiling Vortex** (close burst 3 vs. Fort, recharges when bloodied) deals no
  damage on a hit, but instead knocks targets prone and weakens then (save
  ends). Missed enemies take necrotic damage. At the end of all this, the
  renegade gains 5 temp HP for every target it hit with the power.

- **Defiling Blast** (close blast 5 vs. Ref, recharge 5+) does necrotic damage
  and dazes (save ends). The renegade gains a +4 to all damage while any target
  remains dazed by this power.

And as it suits a solo, we also get a ton of triggered actions. The renegade has
the same **Variable Resistance** as a demon, usable 2 times per encounter. To
refresh our memories: the value of this resistance is 10, and when the renegade
takes elemental damage it can switch the resistance to resist that damage type
as a free action, up to the encounter limit, when the resistance retains its
final type.

If an enemy hits the renegade while granting combat advantage to it, the
renegade can cast a **Wrath Sphere** (close burst 1 vs. Fort) against that
enemy, dealing force damage and pushing it 2 squares on a hit. And when the
renegade is first bloodied, **Bloodied Defiling** triggers to let it immediately
recharge and use Defiling Blast again.

That's a lot of stuff, but that's a solo for you. Almost dragon-like, this one.


## Encounters and Final Impressions

Free broghs have no reason to quarrel with PCs unless provoked, and if that
happens the warriors will cover the retreat of the rest of the group while
hurlers help from further away. They might also keep several of the hardy beasts
described in this book, and they might help in a fight too.

Enslaved or mercenary individuals might be found in mixed sapient encounter
groups. Renegade defilers will often be _leading_ such a villain group. A single
renegade is a nice "welcome to paragon tier" boss fight. One plus some
lieutenants makes for a nice set piece battle for mid-paragon heroes.

I like their mechanics and I like parts of their lore, but as I already
mentioned I don't like the way the book keeps saying how brohgs are stupid and
simple-minded, and how it manages to make them superstitious despite living in a
D&D world and having their own working magical tradition. Distrusting arcane
magic in Dark Sun is sensible, but having the brohgs do it because they falsely
believe it's a curse from evil spirits is a step too far in my opinion.
