---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Lolth"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Lolth is likely to be among the very first Big Bads of D&D. I think her first
officially published mention was in The Village of Hommlet, an adventure
published in 1979 featuring one of her priests as the final antagonist. Since
that adventure and the Temple of Elemental Evil that follows it were all based
on Gary Gygax's original campaign, there's a chance Lolth was was a thing for a
few years before that even though she doesn't appear in the first Monster
Manual.

She would make a personal appearance in 1980's Queen of the Demonweb Pits, where
she officially became the patron goddess of the drow and started getting a lot
more publicity. The drow and their goddess would get plenty of spotlight time in
that edition and all subsequent ones, for good and ill.

By the time we get to this entry in the MM3, we've already seen basically every
other Lolth-associated monster make their appearance, populating the entire
range from heroic to epic tier. We also heard a lot about Lolth herself as a
goddess in other supplements. This is where we finally get her stats. She is the
second "epic end boss" to make an appearance in this book, but not the last.

## The Lore

Lolth is described by the DMG as the goddess of shadows, lies, and spiders. As
we saw in the various Drow entries, back in mythic times she led a major
uprising against the other elven gods. Her defeat in her civil war saw her and
her proto-elf fey followers banished from the Feywild. Her followers moved to
the Underdark, where over time they evolved into the drow. Lolth herself took up
residence in the Abyss, crafting a whole layer of it into her personal domain.

If I remember correctly, some of the divine-oriented supplements hint that
Corellon wasn't entirely innocent in all of this, and that the reason Lolth rose
up against him is that he committed a great injustice against her. It wouldn't
be too far off the mark to say that she wasn't evil back then, and that it was
either the trauma of this first betrayal or a few aeons of living in the Abyss
that made her so.

Regardless of her past history, the Lolth of _today_ is certainly Chaotic
Evil. Her followers organize themselves in strict hierarchies where the powerful
are free to abuse the weak, and the weak are encouraged to rise in power by
betraying and murdering their rivals and superiors. Lolth herself doesn't much
trust her followers as we've seen in past entries: she created at least two
monsters whose main purpose is to infiltrate their hierarchies and keep an eye
on them.

So, in a way, you could say Lolth is the goddess of the cycle of abuse. She
inflicts on her followers the same suffering she went through long ago, and
encourages them to do the same to their subordinates.

Her dominion is the sixty-sixth layer of the Abyss, a place known as the
Demonweb. As the name implies it's a gigantic web strung across a series of
titanic pillars. On its strands rest many relics stolen from other worlds,
ranging from standard magic items all the way up to entire ruined
cities. Beneath the Web is a black void, and at the bottom of this void are the
Demonweb Pits, Lolth's true headquarters. Here is where she holds court.

The Pits contain a multitude of portals to other layers of the Abyss and to
other planes entirely, and they're one of the reasons why Lolth's machinations
have such a large reach.

### The Monsters

This entry contains stats not only for Lolth, but also for her Aspect and her
Exarch. We'll describe them in order of level, like we've been doing for the
other big shots in this series.

### Aspect of Lolth

Aspects are fragments of a deity's power and mind. They share the original
deity's personality and goals, but their existence is independent. Though
they're never as powerful as the original deity, they're still epic-tier. These
used to be called "avatars" in previous editions.

Most gods send their aspects to aid their most favored mortal servants, usually
in response to a ritual requesting this aid. Lolth is an exception. Anyone who
would have the power to call an aspect of Lolth is sufficiently initiated into
her mysteries to know that this is a _very bad idea_. Instead, they spend their
effort making sure she never has cause to send one.

The reason for this is what Lolth sends her aspects as infiltrators whose goal
is to influence drow society in ways that align with her goals. The aspect's
natural form is that of a giant demonic spider, but it can assume the form of a
drow. It's usual MO is to kill and replace an authority figure, and use the
victim's power and influence to fulfill its mission. When forced to fight, it
reverts to its true form and "generously" spends the lives of its underlings to
buy victory, or at least survival.

Aspects of Lolth are Level 25 Elite Lurkers with 368 HP. They're Large Immortal
Magical Beasts in their natural forms, but shrink to Medium size when disguised
as drow. They have ground and Spider Climb speeds of 6, Darkvision, and
Blindsight 5. They have Resist 30 Poison.

When an aspect hits a creature granting **Combat Advantage** to it, that
creature is weakened and takes 20 ongoing poison damage (save ends both) in
addition to sufferint all the standard effects of the attack.

Its basic attack is a **bite**. It can also shoot **Acid Webs** (recharge 5+) in
a Clost Blast 5. This deals acid damage and slows (save ends). On the first
failed save, the target also begins taking 20 ongoing acid damage until they
pass a save.

They also have a nasty power named **Worthy Sacrifice**, an area burst attack
centered on a non-minion drow, spider, or demon ally. This reduces the ally to 0
HP, and attacks the Reflex of every enemy in the blast area. This attack is
non-damaging but immobilizes all those it hits (save ends). It also creates a
zone of webbed gore that lasts until the end of the encounter and immobilizes
any non-spider who ends their move inside (save ends). This recharges when the
Aspect is first bloodied.

As minor actions, the aspect can create a **Cloud of Darkness** that blinds and
blocks line of sight for anyone but itself; and **Change Shape** to appear as a
Medium drow. The Insight DC to pierce the disguise is 43.

If anyone moves adjacent to the aspect, it can use its **Impaling Legs** as an
interrupt. This is an attack that deals physical damage and grabs the
target. Grabbed targets take 10 ongoing poison damage until they escape.

Being immobilized doesn't actually make you grant combat advantage, but being
blinded does. The Aspect should fight alongside allies who can flank the
immobilized PCs. Worthy Sacrifice should be reserved to use on an ally who's
about to die anyway.

### Eclavdra, Exarch of Lolth

Eclavdra has an interesting publication history. Turns out _she_ is the actual
final boss of the GDQ series, the one who used to be behind the giant attacks
and everything. And she's not even a Lolth worshipper there! Killing Lolth in
those modules is more of a weird detour than the actual thing that solves the
problem. A reference to this makes it into her descrpition here.

Eclavdra is described by the book as the "quintessential drow". Another way of
putting it might be that no one in the universe has a deeper understanding of
Lolth's mysteries aside from the goddess herself. This means Eclavdra is both
Lolth's greatest ally and her most dangerous enemy.

Eclavdra has tried to betray Lolth not once, but _twice_. The first time she
worked with the Elder Elemental Eye (that's the GDQ adventures), and the second
she worked with Graz'zt. She still carries the a relic of the Eye, the Tentacle
Rod, and uses it as her main weapon and implement.

Despite these previous betrayals, Eclavdra has not only remained in Lolth's good
graces, but her standing seems to have _improved_. Maybe the Lady of Spiders
admires her audacity. When roleplaying Eclavdra, it would not be out of place to
take your cues from Vriska and Starscream.

Eclavdra is a drow, and thus a Medium Fey Humanoid. She's also a Level 28 Elite
Soldier with the Leader keyword. She has the drow's Speed 7 and Darkvision. She
has no special resistances, even to poison, because Lolth is not stupid.

As she is the **Spider Queen's Emissary**, any demon, drow, and spider allies
within 5 squares of Eclavdra have a +2 bonus to attack and can shift 1 square as
a minor action. Her **Tentacle Rod** has Reach 3, and can be used in a few
special maneuvers in addition to giving her a basic attack.

**Tentacle Lash** has the same reach and damage as a basic attack, but on a hit
it also strips all poison resistance or immunity from the target _for the rest
of the encounter_. The target is also slowed (save ends). This is an at-will
power!

**Insidious Offer** is a ranged spell that deals very weak psychic damage for
its level... but on a hit it forces one of those interesting choices I like so
much. The target must choose between taking an extra 30 psychic damage from the
attack, or becoming dominated (save ends). That's very in theme - it's not
"real" betrayal if it's not a choice.

Eclavdra's minor-action attacks are an unfortunate throwback to the "sexy
dominatrix drow" days. **Entrancing Beauty** is a Close Burst 5 that targets all
enemies, deals light psychic damage, and pulls then 2 squares on a hit. **On
Your Knees** is a non-damaging attack with the tentacle rod that makes the
target fall prone and prevents them from standing up (save ends).

Finally, **Blinking Escape** allows Eclavdra to teleport 6 squares and gain
concealment as a reaction when she's hit by a close or area attack.

Eclavdra is loathe to risk her own life. She will make use of guile and
manipulation to prevent hostilities from initiating, and when they do she will
use her underlings as shields. When the tide of battle turns against her, she
will attempt to run away.

### Lolth, The Demon Queen of Spiders

There's no need to repeat the lore of Lolth here - it's all up at the start of
the article. Mechanically, she is notable for being the first official two-stage
boss I've seen. I believe she's also the first actual god to get stats in this
edition, and the most powerful endgame boss so far.

This means she has two stat blocks! The first is her drow form, in which she is
a Level 35 Solo Lurker with 634 HP. When she hits 0 HP in this form, she becomes
a Huge demonic spider who is a Level 35 Solo Brute with another 634 HP.

In both forms Lolth has ground, climb, and teleport speeds of 8. She also has
Darkvision, Blindsight 20, and is immune to poison. Her remaining abilities are
entirely different in both forms.

In her **drow form**, Lolth fights with a **Scourge**, a multi-tailed whip. Its
attacks are Reach 3, do some light physical damage, and slide the target 3
squares. They also inflict ongoing 20 poison damage (save ends).

She can use the **Insidious Poison** ability (recharge 4+) to automatically
force an enemy that's taking ongoing poison damage to attack an ally. That
attack deals a lot of extra poison damage as well.

She has three minor-action attacks. **Lolth's Kiss** is a Reach 1 melee attack
that deals a bit less damage than the scourge, but inflicts the same amount of
ongoing poison damage. **Poison Strands** is a ranged attack that deals no
immediate damage but immobilizes (save ends). After the first saved throw, this
worsens to Restrained. After the second the target begins taking _50 ongoing
poison damage_ until they pass a save to end all of this at once. That's the
deadliest poison in existence! And yeah, both of these are at will.

The third is an encounter power: **Impenetrable Darkfire** is a Close Burst 5
that targets enemies. It blinds, inflicts 20 ongoing fire damage, and makes
it impossible for them to benefit from cover or concealment (save ends all). It
also creates a zone that lasts for a turn, blocks line of sight for everyone
but Lolth, and blinds anyone inside who is not Lolth.

When an enemy hits Lolth, she can use a **Dominating Rebuke** as a reaction to
_automatically_ dominate them for a turn. And as a deity, her **Immortal
Resilience** allows her to save against any effect that a save can end,
_immediately_ and _automatically_. This is a "No Action" effect, meaning it
_always happens_, no matter how many times a turn they hit her with save-ends
effects.

The transformation that happens when Drow Lolth hits 0 HP is also an attack. It
targets all enemies in a Close Burst 10. On a hit they become vulnerable 20 to
all damage, and are stunned (save ends both). As an aftereffect after passing
the save, they're pushed their speed away from her and are dazed for a
turn. After this resolves, Lolth assumes her spider shape, and uses that stat
block going forward.

**Lolth the Spider Queen** is, as mentioned, a Huge spider and a Level 35
Brute. Her basic attack is now a **Bite** that deals much stronger base damage
and still inflicts 20 ongoing poison damage. **Insidious Poison** is still here
and work the same, but the damage bonus is bigger.

As a minor action she can spray **Burning Webs** in a Close Burst 5 that deal acid
damage and immobilize (save ends). After failing the first saving throw, victims
are restrained instead and take 30 ongoing acid damage.

**Immortal Resilience** is still here and works the same. She also has
**Impaling Legs** like those of her Aspect, but they're Reach 3 and trigger when
an enemy moves into reach. A target hit by the attack is restrained and begins
taking ongoing 20 poison damage (save ends both).

Finally, when Spider Lolth is first bloodied, she uses **Divine Discorporation**
to escape. This works automatically, and causes her mind to leave her body and
be unable to assume physical shape for a while. This period can last several
years, and while Lolth's power will be greatly diminished during this time she's
still alive and can direct her forces. A bit like Sauron in Lord of the Rings.

To truly kill Lolth, the PCs must fulfill a condition or complete a quest that's
specific to her. If this happens, then she's prevented from discorporating and
can be fought until truly killed. The book presents three example quests, and
the GM is encouraged to come up with something that fits their specific world
and campaign.

The example quests are:

- **The Loom of Fate**, an artifact hidden deep within Corellon's palace in
  Arvandor. It was once used by Lolth, and it can be used by the PCs to
  rearrange the threads of her fate and make her defeatable. Corellon knows this
  but fears to use it.

- **The Egg of Lolth**, a mysterious artifact that can be destroyed to seal the
  gates going out of the Demonweb Pits and thus prevent Lolth's escape. How are
  you going to get out, though?

- **Lolth's Prison**, a demiplane beyond even the Demonweb Pits, where a dread
  Bone Colossus guards the Pendant of Truth. Brandishing the Pendant before the
  goddess of lies prevents her from discorporating.

## Final Impressions

All of these enemies are quite interesting mechanically. I particularly like
Lolth's two-stage-boss design. Her drow form is all about the insidious
poisoning of mind and body. Her attacks deal little immediate damage, and the
riders are what kills you. The spider form is a lot more direct.

As a Level 35 monster, a max-level party is going to have some trouble hitting
Lolth and avoiding her strikes. This fortunately doesn't affect saves, but even
so the PC's leaders should have plenty of save-granting abilities and items on
hand, because failing those saves has dreadful consequences. Conversely, offense
should focus on abilities that deal direct non-poison damage and whose riders
are either immediate or last a turn, because she's immune to anything that
requires a save.

I also love Eclavdra's description as a Starscream figure. That even works as a
proper elven surname if you want it to be really on the nose.
