---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Dragonborn (Dray)"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

Despite the title of their entry, these Dragonborn are _not_ a new
addition. Dark Sun is one of two 2e settings (that I know of) that had draconic
humanoids in it since its initial publication.

## The Lore

Despite using dragonborn stats for the PC version, these are not the same
dragonborn as the ones from the standard Points of Light setting. Athasian
dragonborn are known as Dray, are lankier than the standard variety, and have a
completely different origin.

The Dray species was created by the sorcerer-king Dregoth to be his perfect
servants and minions, but he was dissatisfied with the result and cast most
of them out of his city-state of Giustenal. Those he allowed to stay kept
serving him until the other sorcerer-kings banded together to destroy Dregoth
and his city.

Today's Dray are descended both from the outcasts, and from the survivors of
Giustenal's destruction. Their total population is relatively small and few
people know of their existence. Their communities are either small scattered
tribes in the wastes or the rare enclave embedded in a larger community.

Their reputation among those who know about them is as slavers and
sorcerers. #NotAllDray deserve this reputation... but a significant majority of
them do. They practice defiling magic and slavery, and frequently act as
mercenaries for other groups who are okay with this. In this, they continue the
cycle of abuse, inflicting on others what their creator inflicted on them.

## The Numbers

Dray, like standard dragonborn, are Medium Natural Humanoids with a Speed
of 6. They can use a **Dragon Breath** once per encounter, a Close Blast 3
vs. Reflex that deals some sort of elemental damage and whose details vary with
the stat block.

You can easily use standard dragonborn stat blocks from the other monster books
as more dray varieties if you need to.

### Dragonborn Slaver

These assholes roam the desert looking for easily taken captives that they can
sell to the sorcerer-kings in exchange for their money and favor. They're
frequently found in mixed-species slaver parties as their rank-and-file muscle.

Slavers are Level 16 Minion Soldiers that fight with **Bastard Swords** which
damage and mark for a turn on a hit. Their **Dragon Breath** deals lightning
damage and marks (save ends).

They're tougher than your average minion too - the first time they drop to 0 HP,
their **Determined Defender** trait lets them recover, clear any effects on
them, and get back on at the start of their next turn. This makes them more
willing to risk harm when surrounding the PCs.

### Dragonborn Scorned Champion

A few dray take pride in being scorned by their creator, making that part of
their identity. I'm guessing these are the nicer ones, since it would make sense
for them to reject the ways of that creator. The Scorned Champion is an example
of someone who might rise to lead a community of these Dray. Still, he's
sensitive to anything he perceives as a challenge to his position, and is quick
to strike down the source of that challenge.

The Scorned Champion is a Level 16 Skirmisher with 151 HP. This cocky fighter's
**Bravura Poise** acts as an aura (1) that forces enemies inside to grant combat
advantage. He fights with a **scimitar** that damages the target and lets him
shift 1 square on a hit. The **Dray Fury** special attack (recharge 4+) lets him
shift his speed and strike twice with the scimitar at any point during this
movement. His **DragonBreath** can exclude one creature of his choice from the
blast, and deals fire-and-lightning damage. Finally, his **Unstoppable Force**
power lets him immediately end any Slow or Immobilize effect on him once per
round.

### Dragonborn Defiler

Drays like this one go in the other direction - they look fondly upon the past
when they could walk the streets unchallenged, openly displaying their arcane
might. They want the power to do that again, and see defiling as the quickest
way to get there.

The Defiler is Level 18 Artillery with 129 HP. They use **daggers** as weapons
and implements, and the damage roll on this attack has a funky format that mixes
physical and cold damage. Their basic ranged attack is a **Dragonfear Ray**
(ranged 10 vs. Will) that deals psychic damage and causes the target to take 5
damage each time they damage the defiler or one of its allies, until the end of
the target's next turn.

Their dragon breath has been corrupted into a **Defiling Breath** (close blast 5
vs. Reflex) that deals immediate and ongoing cold-and-necrotic damage (save
ends). While at least one target is taking this ongoing damage, the defiler has
+2 to all attacks and +5 to all damage rolls. This recharges if the defiler
misses every target with the power, so it will keep doing it until it hits
someone.

Once per encounter the defiler can cast **Flight of Dragons** as a move action,
allowing every ally within 5 squares to fly 5 squares, and flying 10 squares
itself. It doesn't provoke opportunity attacks when it leaves its starting
square, but obeys the rules normally from that point on.

As a minor action it can also use **Hurled Dragon Breath** (recharge 5+) to do
just that with a less corrupt form of its breath. This is either a Close Blast 5
or an Area 2 Within 10, both targetting Reflex. It deals cold damage on a hit.

### Dragonborn Atavist

Dray like this one prefer to focus on the bestial nature of their dragon
heritage, using ritual techniques to tap into that inner beast and bring it
forth during combat. Why use weapons when you have the power of a dragon at your
disposal? This one's a Level 19 Brute with 220 HP and Resist 10 Acid.

Their basic attacks are a strong **Bite** and a slightly less strong **claw**,
both of which deal ongoing acid damage on a hit (save ends). **Draconic Fury**
(recharge 5+) lets them use both attacks with one action, or even engage in a
classic claw/claw/bite routine if they're bloodied.

Their dragon breath, as you might expect, does acid damage.


## Encounters and Final Impressions

It seems the only stat block here that's actuall evil is the Defiler - everyone
else is unaligned, even the slavers. I'm not sure I agree with that part, but I
suppose you can use their stat block for a more conventional non-evil warrior.

I'm glad the game gives us some tools to stat up a non-evil group of Dray. PCs
have to come from somewhere, and it'd get a little samey if all of them were
nonconformist rebels fleeing their evil upbringing.
