---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Harpy"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
---

D&D Harpies are inspired by the harpies from Greek mythology, with a bit of
siren mixed in. They've been in the game since pretty much the beginning. Here,
they are on the Monster Manual only.

## The Lore

In ancient times there was an evil elf witch queen. She and her unscrupulous
children often took the form of golden eagles to spy on their subjects. A mighty
hero defeated them and drove them into exile, breaking the queen's magic crown
in the process. The crown gave them the power to change shape, and when it broke
the evil family became stuck as part-bird, part-elf beings. These were the first
harpies.

Modern harpies roost in dismal places where few others can live: swamps,
badlands, ruins, coastal cliffs. They fly out to hunt or to attack travelers,
pacifying their victims with their magic-imbued songs and tearing them apart
with their claws.

Both male and female harpies exist, but they usually only spend enough time
together to produce a batch of eggs. Once the female lays her eggs, the male
takes off. Because of this is quite rare for PCs to find a mixed-gender group of
harpies.

## The Numbers

Harpies are Medium Fey Humanoids and have human-level intelligence. This means
there's nothing stopping your setting from containing settlements of unaligned
or friendly harpies, but the ones we get here are Evil bandit-types.

Harpies walk with speed 6 and fly with speed 8 (clumsy), which means they mostly
fight on the ground when using their claws, or from some high perch when using
their ranged special powers. If you want them to be better fliers, removing the
Clumsy keyword is a good start.

Unlike the elves they used to be, harpies have no special ability to see in the
dark.

### Harpy

The classic model is a Level 6 Controller with 71 HP and the common traits
listed above. It also has Resist 10 Thunder.

Harpies fight in melee with their claws, and prefer to do so from the ground
since they're clumsy fliers.

Their main special ability is the afore-mentioned Alluring Song (Close Burst 10
vs. Will), which can affect any non-deaf enemy in range. A hit pulls the target
3 squares and immobilizes them (save ends). The harpy can use a minor action in
subsequent turns to sustain the power and pull anyone who hasn't saved yet
another 3 squares.

Once their enemies are all nice and bunched up, the harpy can let loose a Deadly
Screech (Close Burst 4 vs. Fortitude; recharge 5-6), which does thunder damage
and dazes (save ends).

Both of the harpy's damaging attacks are in serious need of a damage
boost. This, and removing the Clumsy keyword from their flight speed, should be
enough to bring them up to MV standards.

### Bloodfire Harpy

This one doesn't bother with nice songs, it just kills you with fire.

A Bloodfire Harpy is a Level 9 Soldier with 100 HP. It has Resist 10 Fire and
sings a Burning Song (aura 20) that slowly boils the blood of anyone in range
who can hear it, dealing 5 fire damage at the start of their turns.

This harpy also fights with claws, which are red-hot and do a mix of physical
and fire damage. It can also disgorge a Cloud of Ash (Close Blast 3
vs. Fortitude; recharge 4-6) which does fire damage and blinds (save ends).

These fiery things could use the same damage boost as the basic model, but they
work fine otherwise.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Judging by the sample encounters in the book, harpies tend to keep some fine
company:

- Level 6: 3 harpies, 2 spined devils. They have a lot in common when you think
  about it.

- Level 8: 1 bloodfire harpy, 3 gnoll marauders, 2 cacklefiend hyenas. Just a
  bunch of bros hanging out, doing some light pillaging and burning.

- Level 8: 2 harpies, 1 sahuagin priest, 3 sahuagin raiders. Better plug your
  crew's ears before you get too close to _this_ reef.

I like harpies! Mythological monsters are always fun, and these ones have some
interesting song effects. It's also not too hard to come up with new varieties,
like a skirmisher harpy with better agility and Flyby Attack, or one that can
put people to sleep with their song.
