---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Githzerai"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Githzerai were introduced into the game right alongside githyanki. They're the
other side of the gith coin, which contains Ninja and Pirate instead of Heads
and Tails. In the books we're covering, they only appear in the Monster Manual,
but would also feature as a playable character option in the Player's Handbook
3.

## The Lore

Githzerai are an austere and contemplative people who follow a philosophy that
espouses discipline and mastery of the self. It might seem weird that they chose
to make their home in the Elemental Chaos, but they see withstanding the
turbulent nature of that plane as an important step on the road to
enlightenment.

Githzerai live in monasteries spread through the Elemental Chaos, where they
dedicate themselves to studying a martial arts style with a strong psionic
component. They use these arts to both defend themselves and to hunt down their
enemies - mainly mind flayers, which they understandably still hate.

Unlike the githyanki, the githzerai aren't out to conquer the
multiverse. They'll usually keep to themselves unless someone makes an effort to
rile them up. Like any other people they can produce their share of villains and
heroes, though.

The largest known githzerai settlement is Zerthladun, a large city with many
open fields and markets. It's one of the few famous spots of order and
tranquility in the Elemental Chaos and probably one of the nicest given that the
list includes the City of Brass.

## The Numbers

As far as 4e is concerned, githzerai were monks before it was cool. Speculation
about what the Monk class was going to be like started almost as soon as the
first PHB hit the shelves. A lot of players speculated about a "Ki" power
source, and IIRC the designers themselves began thinking in those terms, but
they soon realized writing up Orientalism as a power source was a bad move.

In the end, monks became psionic strikers and were published in the PHB 3
alongside playable githzerai. I imagine the stat blocks we're about to see might
have inspired that decision to some degree.

As far as common traits go, githzerai are Medium Natural Humanoids, and are
faster on their feet than githyanki at Speed 7. They have a power named Iron
Mind, which allows them to gain +2 defense against an attack as an interrupt
once per encounter. This will be used to turn an attack that hit by 2 or less
into a miss.

### Githzerai Cenobite

Cenobites are Level 11 Soldiers with 108 HP, representing the typical martial
artists PCs might meet. They're the kind of fighter who stands their ground and
chases the foe down.

They fight unarmed, and their fists are supposed to cause level-appropriate
damage. Instead of a basic strike they can use an at-will Stunning Fist, which
does a little less damage than the strike but stuns for a turn.

When an enemy shifts away using a movement mode the cenobite also has (i.e,
feet), the cenobite can shift to remain adjacent to them. That means a flying or
teleporting enemy is safe from this.

Their final technique is Trace Chance (Ranged 5; Recharge 6), which hits
automatically and causes the next melee attack made against the target to get a
+5 to-hit bonus and be turned into a critical if it connects. Note that this
attack doesn't have to be from the cenobite!

### Githzerai Zerth

The counterparth to the githyanki gish, this represents an individual who
balances martial and psychic training. It's a Level 13 Elite Controller with 248
HP.

Like the cenobite above, the zerth fights unarmed, and has the same basic
strike, and Trace Chance abilities. Its main ranged attack is Inner Spark
(Ranged 5 vs. Reflex), which does lignthning damage and teleports the target 5
squares to an unnocupied space of the zerth's choosing.

Further teleport shenanigans are possible with Reorder Chaos (Ranged _sight_
vs. Fortitude), which targets up to 4 creatures and swaps their positions as the
zerth sees fit.

Once per encounter the zerth can let loose with Psychic Fists (Close Burst 5
vs. Will; enemies only) for some psychic damage. And in addition to Iron Mind,
it also has a technique named Avenging Wind that triggers as an interrupt when
the zerth is targeted with a ranged attack. This redirects the attack to another
creature of its choice within 5 squares, and allows the zerth to teleport up to
10 squares to become adjacent to the attacker.

In addition to fixing the zerth's damage, I'd probably also give it the ability
to punch twice in an action, since it's an elite.

### Githzerai Mindmage

Mindmages put more emphasis on their mental training, though they can still
punch hard. They're level 14 Artillery with 105 HP.

As mentioned above, their basic melee attack is an unarmed strike. Their main
ranged attack is the Mindstrike (Ranged 20 vs. Reflex), which does psychic
damage and dazes (save ends). Its other options include a Concussion Orb (Area
Burst 2 within 10 vs. Fortitude) that does physical damage and knocks prone, and
a series of Elemental Bolts (Ranged 10 vs. Reflex). Those allow up to 3 attacks
against different targets each of which can do one of fire, lightning, cold or
acid damage at the mindmage's choice.

Concussion Orb is an encounter power and Elemental Bolts is daily. I don't think
that makes much difference for a monster, honestly.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We have two:

- Level 12: 3 cenobites, a guardian naga, and a firelasher elemental. I'm sure
  there's an interesting story about this one.

- Level 14: 1 mindmage, 1 zerth, and 4 cenobites. Ninja death squad!

I really like these guys. They contrast with githyanki in an interesting way,
being approachable in a way their estranged siblings aren't. I think it would
also be really cool for them to be the originators of the monk's mystical
traditions in the setting.
