---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Snake"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Snakes have been in the game since the beginning. They are present both in the
Monster Manual and in the animal appendix of the Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Snakes are real world animals, but there's a huge body of legend surrounding
them in practically every culture. D&D seems to be partial to the Western
depiction of snakes as treacherous and deadly, since it has Zehir as one of its
evil gods.

Still, this entry focuses on _monstrous_ snakes. The mundane varieties likely
behave pretty much as they do in the real world, with a lot of them being
harmless and the dangerous ones only attacking if they feel
threatened.

Though monstrous snakes are large and aggressive enough to actively hunt people,
most are still merely dangerous animals. A rare few might be blessed by Zehir,
though, which makes them sapient, evil, and more powerful.

Between the two books we have quite a lot of different snake stat blocks, so
we'll have two "Numbers" sections to cover them all.

## The Numbers (Monster Manual)

The Monster Manual monstrous snakes are so varied that they have little in
common that I can discuss here. They're all beasts, they all have the Reptile
keyword, and they all bite. That's it.

### Deathrattle Viper

Pretty much a dire rattlesnake. It inhabits forests, jungles, and caves. These
vipers are Medium Natural Beasts, and Level 5 Brutes with 75 HP. They have
low-light vision, and resist 10 poison. Their land speed is 4, and they also
have a climb speed of 4.

Their bony tails produce a magically enhanced **Death Rattle** that acts as an
aura (2) which inflicts a -2 attack penalty to all enemies inside. This is a
fear effect.

Their **bite** allows a secondary attack vs. Fortitude on a hit, which delivers
their venom in the form of immediate and ongoing poison damage (save ends).

Deathrattle Vipers also appear in the Monster Vault, and are identical aside
from their updated bite damage. Their low speed makes running away from them a
feasible tactic even for someone in heavy armor, so they should be paired with
other monsters that make this more difficult.

### Crushgrip Constrictor

This is what you'd get if all the shit they say about boas and anacondas was
true. They're found in jungles, marshes, and underground. Constrictors are Large
Natural Beasts and Level 9 Soldiers with 96 HP. They have land, climb and swim
speeds of 6. They're the other snake that exists in both books.

Their **bite** does damage and grabs on a hit, as the snake quickly coils around
the target. The escape DC 25 for Athletics and 22 for Acrobatics in the MM, and
a gentler 17 in the MV.

Against a grabbed target they can **Constrict**, which targets Fortitude, does a
nice chunk of physical damage, and dazes for a turn.

No explicit mention is made of how many targets the snake can have grabbed. If
you're being relatively realistic, it should be just one. Larger or more
supernatural versions might be able to coil around multiple unfortunates.

### Flame Snake

A snake from the Elemental Chaos. Not much is written about its origins, so it
could be a case of parallel evolution or one of those rare instances where
creatures from the world migrated to the other planes and adapted to them. As
fire elementals, they can be summoned and controlled by magic.

Flame Snakes are Medium Elemental Beasts with the Fire and Reptile
keywords. They're Level 9 Artillery with 74 HP and Resist Fire 20. They have a
speed of 6, but can't climb or swim. They also can't see in the dark, though
it's reasonable to say their incandescent bodies would shed light.

Their **bite** does a mix of physical and fire damage, and they can **Spit
Fire** (Ranged 10 vs. Reflex), doing both immediate and ongoing fire damage
(save ends).

### Shadow Snakes

The blessed of Zehir, these two-headed monsters are made of solid shadow and are
venerated by Yuan-ti. They're level 16 Skirmishers with 158 HP. They slither at
speed 7 and have a climb speed of 7. Their Int is 4: they're not exactly
sapient, but are very cunning, and also Evil.

Their **bites** do physical and ongoing poison damage (save ends), and they can
make **Double Attacks** because of the two heads. Once per encounter they can
make a **Shifting Shadowstrike**, shifting their speed (7) and biting two
different targets as they do so.

Also once per encounter, they can **Vanish Into the Night**, which makes them
insubstantial, gives them phasing, and makes them invisible in dim light. All of
this lasts for a turn and makes for an excellent "escape hatch" when the fight
starts to go badly. I imagine shadow snakes very rarely fight to the death -
they'd be smart enough to cut and run.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The Monster Manual seems to think reptiles gotta stick together, so it has a
bunch of encounters that feature snakes alongside level-appropriate sapient
reptiles that act as their handlers:

- Death rattlers and lizardfolk

- Constrictors and snaketongue cultists (which aren't reptiles, exactly, but are
  close enough).

- Flame Snakes and troglodytes.

- Shadow Snakes and yuan-ti.

I imagine you could use death rattlers as "minibosses" in low-level adventures
featuring kobolds, as well.

These snakes don't exactly rock my world, but I feel they're still a good
addition to the game.
