---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Chimera"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Chimeras come from Greek mythology, where as far as I know it was just _The_
Chimera. D&D likes to make unique monsters into whole species, and this is what
happened here. I remember seeing them statted up for AD&D 2nd Edition in the
past, and they're quite likely much older than that. Here, they're only on the
Monster Manual.

Chimeras in 4e have a lion's body with a dragon's wings and tail. Its three
heads all sprout from the front: the lion in the middle, a goat to the left, and
a dragon to the right. They're Large Natural Magical Beasts, which means they're
both native to the world and sapient. They speak Common and Draconic but aren't
very smart, at Int 5.

A chimera behaves much like the less cerebral types of dragon: it stakes out
territory somewhere and roams the surrounding countriside looking for food to
line its stomach and shiny treasure to line its lair. Sometimes other creatures
will convince a chimera to work for them as muscle, guards, or mounts. They're
Unaligned, but I guess a peaceful interaction with a chimera would be difficult
unless you can convince it you're not prey.

A chimera is a Level 15 Elite Brute with 366 HP. It has both all-around vision
and darkvision, so it can hunt at night just fine and can't be flanked. It also
has Resist 10 fire.

The chimera runs with speed 6, flies with speed 10 (clumsy), and has overland
flight 15. Creatures with overland flight can fly at the listed speed outside of
combat for extended periods, basically. You can run into a chimera quite far
from its lair.

In combat, the chimera will usually attack with all three heads: bites from the
lion and dragon, and a gore from the goat (which knocks prone in addition to
doing damage). The lion bite is its basic attack, but it can attack with all
three heads as a standard action. When it charges it uses the goat head, causing
a little more damage than the standing gore attack.

The dragon head can also breathe fire on a close blast 5, targeting Reflex and
doing fire damage plus ongoing 10 fire damage (save ends) to anyone it
hits. This is an encounter power, but when the chimera is bloodied it will
immediately recharge its breath and use it again as a free action. In other
words, it works exactly like the breath from a real dragon.

The pictured chimera breathes and resists fire because it has red dragon bits,
but they come in all the colors of Tiamat. Just change the element: a black
chimera would use and resist acid, a blue one lightning, and so on.

The suggested encounters are both level 15. The first is 2 chimeras and 2 hill
giants, and the second a chimera, an azer taskmaster, and 6 azer minion
warriors.
