---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Demon"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Strap yourselves in, because we're in for a huuuge multi-entry. So huge, in
fact, that this post is just an introduction to it, and each individual demon
will get their own.

To understand the what 4e demons are like, we have to talk a bit about the
cosmology of D&D 4th Edition, which is significantly different than that of
previous editions.

Fourth Edition's cosmology has been nicknamed the World Axis, because it's more,
well, vertical than the wheel-shaped Great Wheel of earlier editions. You have
the World at the center, with its fey and shadow echoes to either side. You have
the Astral Sea above, and the Elemental Chaos below. We're focusing on that last
one here.

The concept of the Elemental Chaos is that you take all the elemental planes
which used to be separate and make them the same place. It's the natural home of
both traditional elementals and what used to be called "quasi-" and "para-"
elementals back in the AD&D days. It's also the home of the Primordials, titanic
elemental beings who came into existence at the dawn of time and decided to
create the world just for kicks.

The gods came into existence in a similar way up there in the Astral Sea, and
when they saw the world they quite liked it. They went to war with the
Primordials to stop them from unmaking the world - angels and archons, which we
already saw, were the rank-and-file soldiers in this Dawn War.

Now, legend has it that long before even the Dawn War, there was this god named
Tharizdun. He saw the other gods and thought it would be swell if he was lord
over them all. He roamed to the ends of the universe looking for a way to do
that, and somewhere out there he found a tiny shard of ultimate evil. Tharizdun
wasn't a nice fellow even before touching the shard, but after he did that he
was completely corrupted.

So he took the shard to the deepest part of the Elemental Chaos and planted it
there like a seed. This seed sprouted and swallowed everything around it like an
expanding black hole. Everything and everyone in there was completely
corrupted. Tharizdun tried to lead an army of corrupted elementals out of that
cyst of evil to conquer, well, everything, but the other gods banded together to
stop him and seal him up in a place only they knew. They couldn't destroy the
cyst, though, so it remained.

This cyst is the Abyss. The corrupted elementals are Demons. Demons don't belong
in the cosmology the way elementals or even Primordials do. Demons are _wrong_.

Demons don't want wealth or power. They have no use for the souls of mortals and
don't care about corrupting them. Demons only want to destroy as much as
possible before they themselves are destroyed and reborn in the Abyss to do it
again. They only organize through intimidation and brute force, with stronger
demons bullying weaker ones into servitude. Visually, they're all terrifying
monsters. The one whose looks are closest to those of a person has six arms and
and the lower body of a snake.

The strongest demons are the Demon Princes, primordials who were caught in the
Abyss when it formed and were corrupted. They include a lot of the classic
"usual suspects" of D&D: Orcus, Demogorgon, Baphomet... There's also Lolth, a
goddess who became kind of an honorary archdemon after she moved into a region
of the Abyss called the Demonweb Pits. It's quite likely the influence of the
Seed of Evil has corrupted her as much as it did Tharizdun.

Demon Prince-level baddies get their own separate entries: the Demon entry is
for the non-unique monsters beneath them, which can still be quite badass
themselves. The next few posts will cover
