---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Elemental"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Elementals have been part of D&D since its very beginnings. Their basic
definition has remained the same throughout: they're living aglomerations of
elemental matter who often take roughly humanoid forms and have powers related
to their constituent element. They often get summoned by wizards to fight their
enemies, or can be found either as bound guards or as fantasy wildlife.

In earlier editions, you had your four classic elemental planes: Fire, Air,
Water, Earth. They were pretty much composed entirely of their naming element
and were basically places to summon elementals from, since nothing else could
live there. AD&D and its Great Wheel cosmology added a bunch of "quasi-" and
"para-" elemental planes that served as sources of more exotic
elementals. You know how it goes: water and fire equals steam, so there's a
steam plane that's home to steam elementals, and so on.

Fourth Edition instead has the Elemental Chaos, which we already looked at when
talking about demons. It contains _all_ elements, whether they're the classic
four or some of the other mixes. It's also a lot more interesting in that it's
possible for PC adventurers to go there and have adventures in fantastic and
varied landscapes without much in the way of life support. It has entire cities
and civilizations of creatures with the Elemental origin.

And it also has small-e elementals! Their basic nature remains the same, and
they make up much of the "wildlife" of the Elemental Chaos, but much like their
new home plane they can be made up of multiple elements. In fact, 4e went so
hard for these amalgam beings that traditionalist players began to complain that
they never saw plain old single-substance elementals any more. The classics
would finally appear in the Monster Vault.

Elementals don't necessarily band together by element type. Many of them follow
orders from more powerful beings from the Elemental Chaos such as efreets and
titans, and will form up in whatever way their orders require. "Wild" elementals
do like to stick together with others who share one or more of their elements
though.

In this post we'll look at the elementals that appear in the Monster Manual, and
in the next one we'll look at the Monster Vault classics in the next one.

## Monster Manual Elementals

The MM gives us three elementals, all two-element and with levels spanning the
paragon and early epic tier. As usual, the reasoning for these levels is that
the Elemental Chaos is a place you explore when you hit paragon tier, and so
these creatures are a sample of what might oppose you once you're there. All of
them are Large Elemental Magical Beasts, with keywords corresponding to their
constituent elements. They have Int scores between 6 and 8, so they're not
mindless but not very smart either.

### Firelasher

Made of Air and Fire, the firelasher looks like a fire whirlwind with long, thin
tentacles for arms. It's a Level 11 Skirmisher with 108 HP, immune to disease
and poison, and with fire resistance 25. It flies with speed 8 (hover).

Its basic melee attack is the titular fire lash (Melee 2 vs. Reflex, fire
damage). It also has a special attack named Wildfire Cyclone (Close Burst 2
vs. Reflex, recharge 5-6). This does fire damage on a hit, in addition to
pushing the targets and knocking them prone. On a miss, it still does half
damage. And it can also make a Whirlwind Dash, which allows it to fly _twice_
its speed without provoking opportunity attacks and deal 10 automatic fire
damage against anyone whose squares they fly through. This recharges on a 6 and
will likely be used whenever available.

This one pairs very well with other creatures that are resistant to fire, since
it won't need to worry about hurting them with its Whirlwind Dash.

### Rockfire Dreadnought

Sitting t the other end of Paragon Tier, this Earth and Fire beast is a Level 18
Soldier with 170 HP. It's immune to disease, petrification and poison, and has
Resist 25 fire. It runs at speed 8.

This one really feels like it should be a Brute, because it has two very simple
attacks: the Fist of Flame (basic, Melee 2 vs. Reflex, fire damage) and a
chucked Brimstone Rock (Ranged 10/20 vs. AC, physical and fire damage). No
marks, no additional riders.

### Earthwind Ravager

A cyclone full of rocks! It's a Level 23 Controller with 219 HP. It's immune to
disease, petrification and poison, and flies with speed 8 (hover).

The ravager's basic attack is a simple Slam (Melee 2 vs. Fortitude, physical
damage). It can also trap a victim in a Wind Devil (Ranged 5
vs. Fortitude). This does some damage on a hit and immobilized the victim for a
turn. It can also be sustained with a minor action, causing the victim to remain
immobilized for another turn and take some automatic damage.

The ravager can also surround itself with a Whirlwind (Close Burst 1
vs. Fortitude) which does damage and pushes targets 2 squares on a hit. And
finally it can use a Buffeting Blast (Close Blast 3 vs. Fortitude, recharge 5-6)
which does damage and stuns for a turn if it hits.

One of your PCs _will_ remain immobilized for the duration of the combat unless
they can stop the ravager from spending that minor action every
round. Immobilized PCs are of course prime targets for the Buffeting Blast.

### Thunderblast Cyclone

To close it out we have a living storm made of Air and Water. It's Level 26
Elite Artillery with 382 HP, and Huge instead of Large. Immune to disease and
poison, it also has Resist 30 to lightning and thunder and a fly speed of 10
(hover).

This elemental has two basic attacks, a Reach 3 Lightning Arc and a Range 10
Lightning Bolt, both of which target Reflex and do lightning damage. It can also
emit Thunderclaps (Close Burst 2 vs. Fortitude) that cause thunder damage.

When cornered, it can respond by generating a Charged Mist in a Close Burst 3,
which hits automatically for some lightning damage and turns the creature
insubstantial for a turn. Insubstantial creatures can still be hit by attacks,
but they halve all damage they take (including ongoing damage).

Using Charged Mist also charges up the Lightning Storm power (Area Burst 3
Within 20 vs. Reflex), which does a generous amount of thunder and lightning
damage, half on a miss.

## Monster Vault Elementals

The Monster Vault tries to address some long-standing criticism from those
traditionalists I mentioned at the start of this post: that the good old
single-element quartet was nowhere to be seen, and that there were few
elementals suitable for low-level adventurers.

It presents us with four entries, the Lesser Elementals of Air, Earth, Fire and
Water. They're all level 1 or 2, and Small in size. Presumably there's a
3.x-like progression of increasingly powerful traditional elementals, but those
are left as an exercise for the reader.

### Lesser Air Elemental

This Level 1 Lurker has 23 HP, flies with speed 6 (hover), and has Vulnerable 5
fire for some reason. It has a passive trait named Phantom on the Wind, which
makes it automatically turn invisible whenever it starts its turn without an
enemy adjacent to it. This lasts for a turn or until the elemental makes an
attack.

Its basic attack is a relatively weak slam. Its main trick is the Grasp of
Storms (Melee 1 vs. Reflex), which can only target creatures that can't see the
air elemental. A hit does more damage than the slam and grabs the target (escape
DC 12). Grabbed targets take 5 ongoing damage and absorb half the damage of any
attack directed against the monster while the grab lasts. Only one victim at a
time can be grabbed.

A whole pack of these striking from ambush would be Fun (TM), particularly if
they manage to grab multiple PCs. More powerful versions, in addition to being
bigger and having a higher level, could probably turn Grasp of Storms into a
close burst and be able to maintain more grabs at once.

### Lesser Earth Elemental

This Level 2 Soldier has 42 HP. It walks and burrows at speed 5, and has
Tremorsense 5, allowing to sense anyone in that radius as long as they're in
contact with the ground or a wall.

Its Earth Glide trait allows it to phase through earth and rock at will, and its
Brittle Skin trait means it takes a -2 to its defenses for a turn if it takes
any thunder damage.

Its only attack is a slam, which does damage as usual and prevents hit targets
from shifting for a turn. There's also the Overwhelming Stone ability, which
triggers when a nearby enemy hits one of the elemental's allies with a melee
attack. The elemental automatically knocks the attacker prone! This recharges
once the elemental is first bloodied.

More powerful versions can probably use Overwhelming Stone more often, and
likely turn it into an attack that can do damage.

### Lesser Fire Elemental

A Level 1 Skirmisher with 27 HP, the lesser file elemental runs at speed 8 and
flies at speed 4 (clumsy). Its passive traits mean it cannot shift for a turn if
it takes cold damage, and causes 3 damage to anyone who misses it with a melee
attack.

Its slam attack targets Reflex is remarkable for not doing any immediate
damage - it only does ongoing fire damage (save ends). Lesser fire elementals
can also shift as a minor action instead of a move one.

More powerful versions should likely add immediate fire damage to their melee
attacks, and more damage on missed attacks.

### Lesser Water Elemental

A Level 1 Controller with 29 HP, the lesser water elemental walks and swims with
speed 6. It is of course Aquatic, and taking cold damage causes it to take 5
extra damage from the next attack that hits it.

Its slam does relatively little immediate damage, but also does ongoing 5
damage. I guess it fills the target's lungs with water. It also has an encounter
power called Whelm (Close Blast 3 vs. Fortidude, affects only enemies). On a hit
this does damage, pushes the target 2 squares and knocks it prone.

As a minor action, the elemental can slide each creature taking ongoing damage
from its slam by 1 square as it uses the water in their lungs to push them
around.

More powerful versions likely can use Whelm more often and perhaps have it cause
ongoing damage as well.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The MM has two encounters:

- Level 11: A firelasher and a bunch of yuan-ti cultists, placing the elemental
  as summoned muscle.

- Level 18: A rockfire dreadnaught, 2 fire giants, and a mind flayer
  mastermind. I guess ol' squidface managed to snag himself some beefy thralls.

As for the MV lessers, I guess it's actually possible to fight all four of them
at once, as they don't actually get in each other's way! I'd likely add a second
air elemental to make it a proper five-monster band. You can also add them to
any band of low-level opponents that include a spellcaster who could plausibly
summon them.
