---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Vampiric Mist"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Vampiric Mists originally appeared back in AD&D 1e, in Dungeon Magazine 17. This
is their 4e debut, with lore appropriate to the Nentir Vale.

## The Lore

Ancient legends tell that the Witchlight Fens mark the spot where a demon lord
was slain at the dawn of time - the region became a swamp when its corpse fell
there.

In slightly-less-ancient times, a lich whose name has been lost to history
established a lair in the Fens with the goal of finding the remains of this
demon lord and reanimating them as super-powerful undead creature. Accompanying
the lich was a coven of nine vampire lords, its loyal retainers. These vampires
were tasked with hiding and guarding the lich's soul vessel.

Some time after that, one of the lich's enemies, a powerful hag, came to the
fens in search of its soul vessel. She had created a custom ritual to destroy
the vampires, and she enacted it there, but it didn't have the desired
effect. Her magic succeeded at destroying the bodies of the vampires, but their
essence remained and coalesced to form a new, more dangerous
creature. The hag left without finding the artifact, which remains in the Fens
protected by its gaseous guardian.

There's a deserted clearing in the Fens that contains a single slab of stone in
its middle. That is the territory of the monster known as the Crimson Deathmist,
who endlessly roams it looking for new victims. It prefers the blood of elves
and other fey, but it will kill anyone it can reach. It has been a very long
time since anyone who encountered it has lived to tell the tale.

The stone slab conceals the entrance to a catacomb complex where the lich's soul
vessel is hidden. The fate of the lich itself is unknown. Maybe it's still in
the Fens somewhere, or maybe something peculiar happened to it to take it out of
the picture without destroying its vessel.

Not all vampiric mists have such an epic origin. A more common and less powerful
variety appears when a vampire who is forced into mist form has its resting
place destroyed before it can get there. To avoid permanent destruction, the
vampire will sometimes shed its physical form by an act of will, becoming a
vampiric mist. This causes it to lost most of its intellect and memories, and to
become a creature of hunger and instinct.

## The Numbers

We get several varieties of vampiric mist here, which I guess come from
different types of vampire, or vampires who met different ends. One of those is
the late-Paragon Crimson Deathmist, but others hover hungrily around the late
Heroic and early Paragon tiers.

All of them have Darkvision, immunity to disease, 10 Resistance to necrotic and
poison damage, and 5 vulnerability to radiant damage. Their ground speed is 0,
but their flight speed is a 5 with an altitude limit of 2. That means they never
land, but also can't fly beyond melee reach.

All of these creatures have the **Mist Form** trait, which lets them move
through openings of any size and occupy the same space as other creatures. They
also count as **Insubstantial**, taking half damage from everything but fire,
force, or radiant damage. Fire or radiant damage additionally makes them lose
this trait for a turn.

Lesser mists have an aura (1) named **Siphoning Presence** that prevent enemies
inside from spending healing surges, and deal 5/tier necrotic damage to enemies
who end their turns inside. When the aura deals damage, the mist recovers 5
HP. Being inside the mist does count as being inside its aura. They are Medium.

### Vampiric Mist

Our basic model is a Level 9 Skirmisher with 85 HP and all the standard traits
listed above. It can shift its speed as a move action using the **Shifting
Mists** ability, which ensures it will never move normally. Its basic attack is
a contact **Life Drain** that targets Fortitude, deals necrotic damage, and
makes the target vulnerable to necrotic damage for a turn. It can also spread a
**Wave of Lethargy** (recharge 5+) that attacks a Close Burst 2, deals a bit of
psychic and necrotic damage, and slows for a turn.

This thing is almost impossible to pin down. With multiple of them in the same
encounter, some can "prime" targets by hitting them with Life Drain to make them
take increased damage from a Wave of Lethargy.

### Vampiric Mist Corruptor

I guess this is what you get from a more traditional D&D vampire who was capable
of using a dominating gaze and really leaned on this ability. Corruptors are
Level 11 Controllers with 100 HP and all standard traits described above.

As soon as the fight starts they'll try to hit someone with their **Corrupting
Gaze**, which dominates (save ends) on a hit and deals necrotic and psychic
damage as an aftereffect. This recharges whenever the creature doesn't have a
dominated victim!

After dominating a PC, it will attack the others with its **bite**, which deals
necrotic damage and slides 2 squares on a hit. Perfect for dragging other PCs
closer to the dominated one.

When the mist is first bloodied, it will let loose a **Deathly Howl** that hits
a Close Burst 5, pushes 3 squares on a hit and forbids targets from spending
healing surges (save ends).

Don't add more than one or two of these to an encounter group. It's no fun for
anyone if the whole party ends up dominated.

### Chillborn Vampiric Mist

This is a cold-themed mist. It's a Level 9 Soldier with 85 HP and all standard
traits described above. All of its attacks do cold and necrotic damage. There's
a **bite** that slows for a turn and the **Grasp of the Cold Grave** that
immobilizes for a turn.

These mists lack marking capabilities, but their attacks are still very good at
making movement difficult for PCs. It could easily be reskinned into some other
frost-themed ghost without any changes to its stats.

### Crimson Deathmist

The legendary Crimson Deathmist is a Huge entity, and a Level 19 Elite Soldier
with 328 HP. It's faster with a flight speed of 6 and an altitude limit of 3. It
is however slightly more vulnerable to radiant damage (10 instead of 5).

This monster has all the standard traits, but its Siphoning Presence is renamed
to **Impending Doom** and upgraded. I has a radius of 2 instead of 1, and
restores 10 HP to the mist instead of 5.

The Deathmist can pull enemies 4 squares closer with its **Hypnotic Lure**
(at-will, minor action), and then **Demand Obedience** from them. This is a
melee attack that can target two creatures at the same time. It deals psychic
and necrotic damage, with an additional 10 damage the next turn if the targets
attack anyone other than the Deathmist.

Its basic attack is a **Deathly Grasp** that deals necrotic and poison damage
and also slows for a turn. It can also release a **Terror Wave** that deals
psychic damage in a Close Burst 2 and immobilizes for a turn. That last one
recharges when it's bloodied.

## Final Impression

The mists' mechanics are cool, but what really drew my attention was the story
about the lich. A lich whose name is unknown, who lived in ancestral times, who
was interested in undead demon lords, and who is no longer around? That could be
Vecna, whose deeds in this place let him ascend. And instead of a typical soul
vessel you'd find his Eye at the bottom of this catacomb dungeon.

If that doesn't appeal, you'll notice that any party capable of defeating the
Crimson Deathmist guarding the entrance is at about the right level to tackle
the Tomb of Horrors... You'd need to change that clearing a bit to include the
three entrances, but otherwise it's as good a place to put it as any.
