---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Ogrémoch"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Ogrémoch is another of the Princes of Elemental Evil, and first appeared
alongside Imix in the Fiend Folio for AD&D 1e. He is the second, but not the
last, epic campaign end boss to make an appearance on the MM3.

## The Lore

In the beginning there was substance without form, the roiling indistinct mass
of the purest Elemental Chaos. From that mass the eldest primordials arose
spontaneously, and they in turn used their powers to create others. Eventually
this big family decided to get together and create the middle world.

Ogrémoch is one of these eldest Primordials. He witnessed the dawn of time, and
the rise and fall of his children as they built the world and warred with the
gods. Ogrémoch was among the primordials contacted by the Elder Elemental Eye,
and like the other Princes he became convinced the Eye was the very first
primordial. Concerned about the gods' growing influence on the world, he decided
to join the Dawn War in concert with the other Princes. Despite their atypical
level of teamwork, they lost.

Unlike Imix, Ogrémoch did not escape the gods. He was captured and chained to
his own realm by Moradin. Though he cannot leave, he can still influence the
world through his many cults. His goals are to free both himself and the Elder
Elemental Eye, and to finish what he started during the Dawn War.

His greater age and more stable element make Ogrémoch a more patient and wise
Primordial than Imix. Where Imix is a cowardly hothead, Ogrémoch is a cryptic
miser. As the Primordial of Earth, he rules over everything that is hidden
underground, from metal and gem deposits to caves, ruins, and the treasures
buried inside them. Ogrémoch knows many secrets that give one power over the
earth and its hidden bounty, but he's jealous of them and only gives them up
reluctantly.

It takes a lot of time and patience for his cultists to earn enough favor to
learn those secrets, so earth magic is rarer among them than you would
expect. It's no unusual for a cult leader to have to rely on hired muscle to
reinforce the security of their hidden shrines.

There are many independent cults to Ogrémoch spread throughout the world, and
though the details of their beliefs and practices may differ, they're all
structured like mystery cults. They thrive on the rustic fringes of "civilized"
lands, tricking the innocent and ignorant into believing Ogrémoch is a
benevolent power of the earth. By the time these unfortunates learn the truth,
it's too late to escape the cult's grasp. More rarely, they attract more
well-informed people who seek an alternative to the gods. While there are
several deities who preside over the same concepts as the primordial, these
recruits probably reason that, as the older being, Ogrémoch has more of a claim
to these domains.

At the highest levels of initiation, the differences between the many cults fall
away, and the existence of the Elder Elemental Eye is revealed. These
high-ranking cultists serve Ogrémoch and the Eye in equal measure, and out of
all of the elemental cults they're the most willing to genuinely cooperate in
freeing their masters

## The Monsters

We'll start by looking at the cultists, and finish with the stats for Ogrémoch
himself.

The various cultist stat blocks represent people of various species that managed
to gain power from their worship. As with Imix cultists, there aren't enough of
them to build encounter groups - they're meant to be added to groups of other
humanoids or monsters representing hired muscle or "unpowered" cultists.

Any earth-elemental creature might be associated with a cult of Ogrémoch,
including hill and earth giants. Underground dwellers like grimlocks and
troglodytes are also frequently drawn to his service, as are "giantish" people
like ogres or ettins. And of course, any "generic" humanoid stat block can be
lightly reskinned as a cultist as well.

### Earth Cultist

These are common servitors, largely ignorant of the deeper mysteries, serving
because they know nothing else. They're Level 8 Minion Controllers wearing
leather and wielding **warhammers**. The scrap of primordial power within then
explodes in a **Petrifying Font** when they drop to 0 HP: it automatically hits
every enemy adjacent to the cultist and slows them (save ends). After the first
failed save, this worsens to _petrified_ (save ends).

Yikes! These poor souls are unwitting time bombs, and quite dangerous for
minions. Evil GMs would mix them in with standard [Human minions][2] and make it
hard for players to tell them apart at first. Once the cultist's capabilities
have been identified, it's best to take then out with ranged attacks.

### Fist of the Stone Tyrant

Every dwarf culture remembers their period of enslavement to the giants as the
Age of Chains. Most of them became resentful of the primordials after attaining
their freedom, and turned to worship of the gods. One felt the opposite, turning
away from the gods who did not help them and towards the primordials who had
proven they would reward their worshippers well. The Fist of the Stone Tyrant is
a champion from this culture.

This Fist is a Level 9 Soldier (Leader) with 98 HP and a Speed of 5 (Earth
Walk). They have two simultaneous auras with a radius of 1: **Rotting Earth**
slows enemies inside, and **Stone Tyrant's Boon** grants allies inside a +2
bonus to AC and Fortitude. Like any other dwarf, the Fist reduces any forced
movement inflicted upon it by 1. It also gets an immediate save to avoid being
knocked prone.

The Fist's **war pick** damages and marks for a turn on a hit, and if any marked
enemy leaves its Rotting Earth aura the champion can shift 1 square and make a
free attack against that enemy. The attack deals light physical damage, 5
ongoing necrotic damage (save ends) and immobilizes for a turn on a hit.

### Stone Thrall

Ogres who live in hill giant territories might end up picking worship of
Ogrémoch from them. Some of these ogres get drawn into the cult and infused with
earth magic to act as guards and shock troops.

Stone Thralls are Level 15 Brutes with 184 HP. They fight with **Mauls** whose
basic attacks damage and force the target to grant combat advantage for a
turn. They can use a **Crushing Smash** against someone granting them CA to do
heavier damage, knock the target prone, and make them both immobilized and
unable to stand up (save ends).

They can also make **Wild Swings**, attacking up to 2 creatures with one
action. A hit deals heavy damage and dazes (save ends). This is an encounter
power that recharges when the ogre is first bloodied.

### Earth Weird

Ogrémoch rarely deigns to notice individual mortals. Sometimes, though, a
cultist comes along with such an aptitude for earth magic that the primordial
ends up giving them a direct blessing. This turns them into earth weirds.

The one depicted here is an earthsoul genasi, and a Level 16 Controller with 148
HP. It fights with a **Morningstar** that damages and pushes the target 1
square. It also uses a bunch of different earth-themed spells:

- **Quake Bolt** is a basic ranged attack that damages and knocks prone.

- **Bury** targets a prone enemy and does no immediate damage, but it
  immobilizes the target, prevents them from standing up and inflicts ongoing 10
  damage (save ends all). After passing the save, the target is slowed for a turn.

- **Stoneburst** is a ranged area attack that damages and created a zone of
  difficult terraint for a turn.

- And finally, **Earthshock** is a minor action encounter power that does no
  damage but knocks every enemy touching a solid surface in a Close Burst 1
  prone.

The weird wants to knock you down and bury you. It pairs well with other enemies
with knockdown abilities.

### Chthonic Apostle

Most giants who serve Ogrémoch do so more out of fear than true devotion. This
one is an exception, and has been rewarded for it.

The Apostle depicted here is a hill giant, and a Level 24 Soldier with 225
HP. It fights with a giant-sized, Reach 3 **greatspear** whose basic attacks
damage and mark for a turn on a hit. It can also use the spear to **impale** a
marked creature, which deals light physical damage to start with and slides the
creature to the apostle's space as they slide down the length of the weapon. The
target is immobilized and takes 10 ongoing damage, automatically moving when the
apostle moves. The apostle can keep attacking with the spear, and every time
they do so the impaled victim takes another 10 damage and becomes dazed for a
turn. When they successfully save against this, they slide to a space adjacent
to the apostle as they free themselves.

When the apostle becomes bloodied, their **Stone Curse** begins to take
effect. Their speed drops from the standard giant 8 to a 4, and they rain Resist
10 to all damage. When the apostle drops to 0 HP, they permanently become a
stone statue, which counts as blocking terrain. If they have a victim impaled
when that happens, the victim becomes restrained instead of immobilized. A save
still frees them as above.

### Chthonic Stoneshaper

Worship of Ogrémoch is almost as old as mortal life itself. There are profoundly
ancient shrines and temples to the primordial in the depths of the
Underdark. Those who undertake a prilgrimage to these sites and survive the
journey are rewarded with potent magic, and by having much of their troublesome
free will taken away.

The Stoneshaper depicted here is a human who has undergone this process. It's
basically a powered-up Earth Weird, with more damaging spells. It's Level 24
Artillery with 175 HP. They fight with **Warhammers**, and have several
spells. First there's **Stony Embrace** (Ranged 10), a basic attack that
damages, restrains and inflicts 10 ongoing damage on a hit (save ends). Then
there's **Rending Earth** (Ranged 20), which targets enemies restrained by Stony
Embrace, deals slightly more damage, and stuns then (save ends). Finally there's
**Unruly Earth**, a close burst 2 that damages, pushes 3 squares, and knocks
prone on a hit. This only targets enemies, too, so it can be used safely in a
melee.

A "save ends" stun is extremely powerful, and though the targetting condition
for Rending Earth is fairly restrictive a focused and lucky stoneshaper might be
able to use it every other turn. When fighting an enemy group including a
stoneshaper, follow the old Shadowrun adage and geek the mage first. The
stoneshaper will make this hard because the ranges involved make it easy for the
stoneshaper to stay far away and play hit-and-run.




[2]: {{ "/2020/06/05/human.html" | relative_url }}
