---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Destrachan"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The first non-demonic monster we're going to look at in ages is the
Destrachan. These aberrant dinosaur things first showed up in the Monster Manual
2 for D&D 3.0, if I'm not mistaken. So, in a way, they're being promoted. They
appear only on the MM.

## The Lore

Destrachans are sapient predators, roaming dungeons and other underground
locations guided by their non-visual senses. When they find something they think
they can eat, they kill it dead using bone-shattering bursts of sound. They can
learn to mimic sounds they hear often, and will use those to help disguise their
approach, which explains why they're trained in Bluff. I wonder how common it is
for a destrachan to mimic the voice of a dying adventurer asking for help.

These creatures have an affinity for other aberrant monsters, and will often
team up with them. They'll also often ally with other underground dwellers and
monstrous humanoids such as drow, grimlocks, medusas, trolls... It's a good bet
Eberron's Droaam has its share of destrachan citizens.

## The Numbers

We get two varieties of Destrachan here, both Large Aberrant Magical Beasts
(blind). They're also both Evil.

The standard **Destrachan** is Level 9 Artillery with 80 HP. It has blindsight
10, is immune to gaze attacks and has Resist Thunder 10. It has a ground speed
of 6 and a climb speed of 3, so this is yet another Underdark monster who can
drop on you from the ceiling.

Its basic melee attack is a weak Reach 1 claw, and its main attack is a Range 10
Sound Pulse that targets Reflex and does thunder damage. It can also go louder
and use a Bellowing Blast quite often (recharge 3-6). This targets Fortitude in
a Close Blast 5, does the same thunder damage as the pulse, and dazes (save
ends).

The monster prefers to stay far away and attack with sound pulses, but it has no
reason to not spam Bellowing Blast as often as possible if the PCs manage to
close in.

The **Destrachan Far Voice** is a smarter (Int 10 instead of 7) and stronger
variant. It's Level 15 Artillery with 122 HP. Its blindsight increases to 20,
its thunder resistance to 15, and its speed to 8 (climb 4).

It has the same attacks as the classic model, adjusted for the level-up, and a
new encounter power named Reverberate. It targets the fortitude of everyone in a
Close Burst 2, does a smidge more thunder damage than the Bellowing Blast, and
_stuns_ (save ends). On a miss, it still does half damage and dazes for a turn.

## Encounters

The entry has two.

- Level 9: 2 destrachans and a trio of assorted foulspawn form an all-aberrant
monster team.

- Level 15: 1 destrachan far voice, 2 driders, and a trio of assorted drow.

## Final Impressions

Destrachans are another of those weird monsters who kinda come out of left
field, but I think their 4e versions at least have a clear mechanical
role. Their propensity to ally with other creatures gives you an excellent
excuse to add some convenient ranged support to monster teams that lack it.
