---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Monster Vault: Devils"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

We've only just spend a whole lot of time looking at demons, and now we're going
to spend a whole lot of time looking at devils. If you're new to D&D in
general, you might be wondering what's the difference between the two types of
monster. Don't the words "demon" and "devil" mean the same thing?

Out here in the real world they pretty much do, but D&D has a long and storied
tradition of making every synonym of a word into an entirely different
monster.

To understand what 4e devils are like, and what makes them different from
demons, I must tell you another story about the World Axis, the cosmology of D&D
4th Edition. This time, it's about the Astral Sea that exists "above" the world.

Just like the Elemental Chaos combined all the separate elemental planes into
one glorious mess, so does the Astral Sea combine all the former non-elemental
outer planes into a single whole. The old astral plane, which used to be a
featureless gray void, is not a literal sea, and if you look into its silvery
depths you can see the light of the stars in the world's firmament. By sailing
the Astral Sea you can reach the domains of the gods, which work both like
islands and like worlds in themselves.

Now, there was this one god who had a very powerful exarch named Asmodeus. The
god was pretty nice all in all, but Asmodeus kept thinking that he was too
nice. "Why", thought Asmodeus, "if I was the big boss here I could do a much
better job. Streamline our processes, leverage our synergies, cut away the
fat". And so Asmodeus built himself an army out of similarly dissatisfied
servants of this god, and any other astral entity who wanted a piece of the
action.

You might be thinking hey, I heard this one before, and you'd be right. The
difference between the classic Lucifer story and this one, is that _here_ the
rebellion was successful, since the god in question wasn't omnipotent. He was
still powerful, however. His dying curse twisted the rebel's bodies into forms
that exposed their inner wickedness.

The rebellious angels and exarchs became devils. The domain of the dead god
twisted into itself and became the Nine Hells. Devils don't belong in the
cosmology the way angels or even evil gods do. Devils are _wrong_.

Still, devils are a lot more "human-ish" in appearance than demons. Most look
like exaggerated versions of tieflings, and even those with a more monstrous
aspect still tend to have a basically humanoid body plan. Infernal society is
militaristic and fiercely competitive, with individual status being determined
by a combination of official rank and one's skill at acquiring mortal souls. I
can't help thinking that Hell seems very _corporate_, since that form of
advancement can be read as "impressing your manager with your productivity so
you get promoted".

Anyway, that "acquiring mortal souls" bit is a big part of the reason for why
devils are _wrong_. Lots of people here in the real world say that when you're
evil in live you go to Hell after death, but that's not how it works in the
World Axis. Evil people who die here likely go to the realm of the evil god
whose credo more closely matches their ethics. To get souls, devils have to go
out and steal them. Each soul stolen by Hell diminishes the power of the gods,
and adds to that of the devils. The general idea seem to be that removing enough
souls from the hands of the gods will weaken then and allow devils to take over.

So even evil gods would have cause to oppose devils, though it turns out several
of them (Bane, Gruumsh, Tiamat, Torog and Vecna) are on more or less friendly
terms with Hell because they struck deals with Asmodeus in the distant past.

Devils have all kinds of uses for souls, from playthings to currency to raw
material for their mightiest inventions and magics. Their methods of acquisition
are many, with the most popular ones being infernal bargains and other types of
trickery. Still, violence is not off the table, putting a new spin on "kill them
and take their stuff".

When devils fight, they do so in a distinctly different way from demons. They're
organized, often in actual military units; and they tend to fight with weapons
rather than relying on claws and fangs.

Asmodeus, now a god, rules all devils from Nessus, the deepest of the Nine
Hells. Each of his exarchs rules one of the other eight layers, and while
they're a little less popular than the demon lords, their names are still
classics: Mammon, Belial, Belzebub, and so on.

I'm not sure these archdevils are statted in any of the monster books; these
entries are for their less powerful underlings. We'll see them starting next
post, using the same order I did with demons: we'll look at the devils from the
MM, and their MV counterparts when they appear. This time it appears that all of
the devils that made it into the MV also exist on the MM.

All of the devils here seem to have two names. One is just an adjective followed
by the word "Devil", the other something more exotic sounding. Since they're
listed in the Monster Manual's table of contents by their more prosaic names,
I'll use those as titles, but I'll also mention the fancier name in each
article.
