---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Gauntlgrym"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

## Historical Errata

There's another bit I missed when I glossed over the big-ass timeline at the
beginning of the book, and now I must correct that here.

The dwarves of Gauntlgrym found the primordial Maegera early in their habitation
of the city, but they left her sealed up for a few hundred years before messing
with her.

The massive project that bound her into a sort of arcane power generator was a
three-way joint project between the dwarves, the mages of Illusk (who were
descended from the Netherese) and the elves of Iliyanbruen. As we saw in the
post about Shandarar, they were still around for a few centuries after the fall
of Netheril, so they took part in this as well. The book describes this as a
positive example of what the three peoples can do when they work together.

Maegera's power allowed the dwarves of Delzoun to create inumerable wonders, in
the form of both potent magical items and marvelous works of infrastructure for
their capital and their empire. Gauntlgrym became a big center of trade and even
saw numerous human families moving there.

The reason it fell was because of the Orc Marches, a massive region-wide
invasion by an army of orcs larger than any seen before or since. By the time
this happened, the three peoples were no longer on speaking terms, as each had
grown more arrogant and mistrustful over time. They could have banded together
to repel the invasion, but each thought they could go it alone. Illusk fell
first, and Delzoun was next, and only at the doors of Shandarar was the
already-weakened orc army repelled.

Iliyanbruen would end up dismantling anyway when it tried to take the fight to
the orcs of Illusk, as we saw earlier. Gauntlgrym was left alone since no one
seemed to be coming up from there. Its surviving dwarves and humans scattered
all over the Realms, with many of the humans joining Uthgardt tribes on the
surface and the dwarves ranging out further to join their other existing nations
as refugees.

The empire of Delzoun and its capital of Gauntlgrym are today kinda like the
dwarven equivalent of the Roman Empire in that stupid meme. No dwarf living
today has ever laid eyes on the lost city, but they all think of it regularly
and described its marvelous halls as being the height of their civilization.

## Gauntlgrym Today

Despite being lost to the surface, Gauntlgrym did not remain static in all these
millennia. The orcs were kicked out by mind flayers; the mind flayers by derro;
and the derro by duergar. That last one happened fairly recently, so the duergar
still consider themselves masters of the place. However, they are not the only
people living there. There are other groups seeking to control the city, and
literal multitudes of ghosts belonging to its original inhabitants.

Let's take a look at the city from the outside in.

### The Great Cavern

This is kind of the antechamber to the lost city, a massive natural cavern
filled with alien Underdark vegetation and labyrinthine formations of
stone pillars and stalagmites. Small forts and balconies are carved into the
walls and around the largest pillars - the remains of former guard posts. The
bones of ancient battles litter the floor.

There's a small lake at the center of the cave, and on one of its walls stands
the massive mithral gate that leads into Gauntlgrym proper. It's nearly
impossible to open by mundane or magical means, but a true heir of Delzoun can
open it with the slightest push. The cave is filled with your preferred
selection of Underdark monsters, and also with two sapient factions.

The first is a group of old Ashmadai who came here with Valindra when she first
tried to free the primordial in that Drizzt novel. The tunnels they used filled
with magma at the end of that, so they became trapped here. Their first reaction
to any strangers they spot is violence, though some of them might be prepared to
surrender or betray the rest in exchange for a way back to the surface.

The second faction is the House Xorlarrin expedition, who arrived recently and
built a hidden camp. They're spying on the Ashmadai while looking for a way to
open the gates. Their reaction to intruding PCs will be to remain hidden and spy
on them as well, waiting to see if they can open the gates. If they can, the
drow will follow them covertly, scattering if spotted, and will only attack if
the PCs become distracted by some other enemy inside the city.

### The Iron Tabernacle

The Iron Tabernacle was Gauntlgrym's temple district, and was both the city's
physical and spiritual center. Its many temples and shrines were dedicated to
Moradin and other good gods, and attended by a sizable contingent of dwarven and
human priests. This enormous multi-leveled district was a marvelous sight to
behold in its glory days, but now most of it lies ravaged by both time and by
duergar impiety. The city's new occupants have defaced every religious image and
statue they could find, and stolen anything of value here, from precious relics
to the mithral trim in the walls.

Still, the Tabernacle is so vast that some shrines remain untouched, or close
enough to it that they could be restored and reconsecrated by PCs. There's a
text box here detailing the minor boons they can gain from doing so. An extended
rest next to the restored shrine takes only three hours instead of six, and has
no danger of being interrupted by wandering monsters. And if a member of the
party is a non-evil dwarf or a worshiper of Moradin, they might gain the
attention of one of the city's ghosts, who will help them in battle the next
time they fight (using a level-appropriate incorporeal undead stat block). Both
benefits only happen once.

The Tabernacle is directly or indirectly connected to every other district in
Gauntlgrym, and is the hub of an extensive rail network traversed by enchanted
mine carts that still move on their own according to an ancient
schedule. There's a big switching station here that PCs can use to switch cars
from one track to another, and they can either ride those carts as an easy way
to get around the city.

Or perhaps not so easy - there are some rules here that might come into play
when a fight happens during a cart ride, or when a cart _derails_ during a
fight.

### Ancient Cemetery

The lowest level of the Tabernacle is a massive collection of crypts, laid out
according to a now forgotten scheme or tradition. Some are simple, some very
elaborate, but all of them have the names, titles, and lineage of their
occupants carved on their stone.

Unlike the upper levels, the crypts are intact. The many, many ghosts who roam
the place attack any would-be vandals and thieves en masse, so the duergar stay
away from here. In a way, this makes the crypts the true treasure of Gauntlgrym,
as most post-Delzoun dwarves still keep detailed records of their lineage and
those could easily connect to the records carved here.

The ghosts will not bother the PCs at first, but will attack as above if they
try to damage or steal from the crypts. The group should take care to remain on
their best behavior while in this area.
