---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Shadar-kai"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

We already saw the basic lore of shadar-kai back in [Let's Read the  Monster
Manual][2], and the Monster Manual 2 brings a few more stat blocks for them.

This is where they add the lore about Shadar-kai seeking extreme sensations to
stave off the soul-draining malaise of the Shadowfell. As I said in the original
post, I prefer to ignore this bit. If you want to add it in, the book also
mentions that offers of novel and/or intense experiences tend to be
well-received when one negotiates with shadar-kai.

In this book we get paragon-tier Shadar-kai, which one can usually meet in the
Shadowfell proper. They retain the MM1 signature traits (low-light vision and
the Shadow Jaunt ability), and get a new gimmick in the form of a new status
effect they can inflict: _shrouded in gloom_. A victim who is shrouded in gloom
takes a -2 penalty to attacks and gains only half the benefit from healing
effects. This seems to always be a "save ends" condition. Their ground speed is
7.

Lastly, the new stat blocks presented here were named by someone who decided
that simple descriptive names like the "Warrior" and "Witch" of the first book
weren't nearly goth enough. Let's check them out.

## Shadar-kai Blacksoul

Blacksouls are spellcasters specializing in harmful shadow-based magic. They're
level 14 Controllers with 138 HP, and all their attacks are spells. **Corrupting
Blackfire** is a basic melee attack that deals fire and necrotic damage;
**Shadowbolt** is a basic ranged attack that deals necrotic damage; and
**Shadowburst** (recharge 6+) deals necrotic damage over a wide area. All three
also shroud the target in gloom on a hit.

The blacksoul's ultimate attack is **Corrupt Soul**, which targets Will and
dominates (save ends). It can only target victims who are shrouded in gloom.

## Shadar-kai Dawnkiller

This absurd edgelord is a Level 14 Lurker with 106 HP. They carry a pair of
**kukris** whose strikes shroud the target in gloom and can also be used to
perform a **shade strike** that does the same damage and blinds instead. Their
**Shadows of the Raven Queen** trait gives them bonus damage against targets who
can't see them.

Dawnkillers likely alternate shade strikes and basic attacks, focusing on a
single PC. They pair really well with the spellcasters from this entry,
providing an extra source of "shrouded in gloom" so their buddies can use their
ultimate attacks earlier.

## Shadar-kai Gloom Lord

Gloom Lords are spellcasters of the same tradition as blacksouls, with a
slightly different spell selection. They're Level 14 Artillery with 108 HP.

Their basic attacks are the same, and their special technique is named
**Shadowcage**. This is an at-will ranged attack that targets the Reflex of a
creature shrouded in gloom. It deals necrotic damage, restrains the target, and
prevents it from moving more than 2 squares away from its original position
until it passes a save to clear all of these effects.

## Sharar-kai Painbearer

They're not in pain, they bring the pain to you. Painbearers are Level 15
Skirmishers with the Leader keyword and 144 hP. They wear leather and wield
spiked chains.

Their basic attack is named **shadow chain**, which does damage and shrouds in
gloom as usual. They can also perform a **Shadow Dance** that allows them to
shift their speed and make three shadow chain attacks against different targets
along the way. Each attack after the first deals an extra 2d6 damage for every
previous attack that hit.

That's the Skirmisher part. The Leader part comes from two other abilities. The
first is a **Shadow Weft** aura (5) that allows shadar-kai allies within to
shift 1 square after they hit with a melee attack. The second is **Shadow
Boon**, a reaction that allows an ally within 10 squares to re-roll an attack
they just missed.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

I'm surprised we didn't get a stat block that was literally named Shadar-kai
Edgelord.

Typical shadar-kai combat encounters will be either agains the villainous sort
that consorts with undead, or the morally ambigious yet antagonistic sort that
swears fealty to the Raven Queen. A more complex encounter might find the PCs
aiding the latter against the former. Either sort of shadar-kai might be riding
nightmares, because of course they would.

We get two sample encounters here:

- Level 13: two dawnkillers and a painbearer accompanied by a
  bodak. Undead-loving villains.

- Level 14: A blacksoul, 2 gloom lords and 2 painbearers. A team where every
  member is a brooding loner, Kamen Rider-style.
