---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Twig Blight"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

D&D Third Edition made many attempts to create new monsters that would grow
popular enough to become iconic, and out of all of those I think the greatest
success were these little critters. And I'm pretty sure their popularity was
accidental.

They first appeared as custom opposition in The Sunless Citadel, the very first
official module for Third Edition. They had a very specific origin tied to the
overall story arc of that campaign. That origin is mentioned in version, but we
also see some lore that talks about them in the Vale.

## The Lore

Twig blights look like large woody shrubs or small trees with interlocking
branches. They can change shape somewhat to blend in with the surrounding
vegetation, and they can also uproot and twist themselves into roughly humanoid
shapes in order to hunt or migrate.

Blights need fresh blood to reproduce and grow, using their roots to absorb it
from the soil or directly from corpses. New seedlings sprout from their root
systems, as many as a dozen at a time. They're very fragile early on, but mature
quickly and after a few days are big enough to start ambushing small creatures.

The first blights originated from the Gulthias Tree, which grew from the stake
used to slay an ancient vampire. Some people speculate that repeating the
process to create a similar tree could create new varieties of twig blight,
though of course few are unbalanced or evil enough to try.

Our Vale-specific story is about a lonely pig farmer named Fellis, who was the
first to discover these creatures in the Vale. A strange new bush appeared
overnight in his slaughter shed, and soon it began sprouting seedlings. Fellis
loved the little scamps, giving them names and playing them tunes on his
flute. His neighbors were very worried about all of this weirdness, but still
regularly went there to trade for pig meat.

During that winter, however, severe snow storms tore through the region and made
regular travel impossible until the thaw. When Fellis' neighbors managed to get
to his farm again, they saw that the man, his family, his pigs, and even the cat
had all been killed. All that was left was a number of pulsating bushes
sprouting from their corpses. Several nearby villages banded together to burn
out the infestation, but a few individuals managed to escape into the
surrounding woods. So now we can add "twig blight infestation" to the list of
everyday disasters that can fall upon the people of the Vale.

Twig blights can survive from normal soil nutrients and sunlight like mundane
plants, but they vastly prefer to have access to a blood supply. Their numbers
increase rapidly when they can find a big source like a slaughterhouse or
battlefield, though even a single corpse is enough to let their reproduction
cycle continue. When their current blood supply runs dry, they'll uproot
themselves to look for more. If can't find a new victim or supply quickly,
they'll take root again and wait in ambush.

Twig blights can even be found in dungeons, ruins, caves, and other places never
touched by the sun. Without access to light, they become even more bloodthirsty
than usual.

Some powerful creatures try to make use of twig blights as unguided boundary
guardians by seeding them along that boundary, but the creatures are fickle and
as likely to follow the wind to nearby settlements as they are to stay in place.

Twig Blights are monsters. They have some intelligence and can even speak Elven,
but they only use that to set up smarter ambushes. They only see other
creatures, sapient or not, as food sources, and only interact with them through
violence. You might be able to keep them contained for a while if you supply
them with enough blood, like Fellis did, but their reproductive cycle will
ensure their population quickly outstrips the supply and begin hunting for live
prey (which means you).

## The Numbers

Twig Blights are Small Fey Humanoids with the Plant tag. They have ground and
climb Speeds of 5 with Forest Walk, and Darkvision. They have Resist Poison 5
and the non-minions have Vulnerable to Fire 5. Their signature trait is
**Rooted**, which reduces forced movement from pulls, pushes, or slides by 3
squares.

Like their original 3e incarnation, they're early Heroic opposition.

### Twig Blight Seedling

A seedling who just grew big enough to hunt. It's a Level 1 Minion
Skirmisher. Their **claw** attack lets them shift 2 squares before making the
roll, deals poison damage, and has a small damage bonus when the target is
granting them combat advantage.

Their tactics are simple: surround and kill.

### Twig Blight

The classic model is a Level 2 Lurker with 28 HP. It can turn **invisible** for
a turn with a standard action, and surprise opponents with **Blighted Claw**
attacks that do heavy poison damage and weaken (save ends). Even a miss still
does half damage and weakens for a turn.

If the blight can't become invisible, it can still attack with basic **claw**
attacks that do a typical amount of poison damage.

### Twig Blight Swampvine

This is a new variant! It could be that classic blights adapted themselves to a
swampy environment... or it could be that someone out there did prove the
stake-tree theorem. They're particularly common in the Witchlight Fens along the
Nentir River.

Swampvines are Level 3 Soldiers with 42 HP. They'll use their minor actions to
pull targets close using a **Swamp Vine**, which also grabs them (escape DC
13). If a grabbed target attacks someone other than the swampvine, they take an
automatic 5 poison damage. They can also make basic **claw** attacks that do
poison damage.

### Twig Blight Swarm

A big bunch of classic twig blights that decided to stop being subtle. It's a
Large Swarm made up of Small creatures, and a Level 5 Brute with 74 HP. It's
Swarm Attack aura deals 3 damage to those inside, and while it looses its
specific vulnerability to fire it's still vulnerable to close and area attacks
like any other swarm.

Its version of **Rooted** makes it completely immune to being pushed, pulled, or
slid, and its **Swarm of Claws** basic attack deals poison damage.

## Final Impressions

I'm sure there are lots of people who will be happy to have official 4e stats
for Twig Blights. Their explicitly unnatural origin and their monstrous
disposition tends to make them better "guilt-free" low-level opponents than your
usual selection of humanoids.

This incarnation of them is also quite tricky for low-level PCs to handle, since
a lot of their early powers rely on forced movement for their more interesting
effects.
