---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Daggerburg Goblins"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-daggerburg-goblins.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

Goblins have always been in the game, as we already know. This is a specific
group of them operating in the southern regions of the Vale.

## The Lore

Between the Witchlight Fens and the Harken Forest, roughly on the south-central
region of the Vale, there is a hidden fort named Daggerburg. It belongs to a
large band of goblin brigands, who ride out of it to raid and pillage the
surrounding area. Their operation is quite successful because they're far away
from the territories of more powerful monsters, and because their very diverse
membership has been extensively trained in guerrilla tactics by their leader
Delderosh.

The band also includes a number of remarkable individuals beyond Delderosh
himself. There's Kabo Bomble, a massive bruiser nearly twice the size of a
typical goblin; and there are the Mistmane Bugbears, a cult who trains in a
particular fighting style combining unarmed combat and necromantic magic.

Delderosh really hates enemy spellcasters and likes collecting their eyeballs as
trophies. He likes spellcasters just fine when they're working for him, though,
which is why he's allied to the necromancer Gokof (from the Cadaver Collector
entry).

The Daggerburg goblins have become more daring of late, and have been pushing
deeper into the Harkenwold region north of the Harken forest, even going so far
as to raid settlements. However they haven't yet worked up the courage to strike
at the Woodsinger elves who also live in the same region.

## The Numbers

The Daggerburg gang tends to be a cut above your standard MM/MV goblins, their
levels covering the latter half of the Heroic Tier instead of the earlier
one. Most of them also have at least one of the following signature abilities
representing their training:

**Combat Adept** gives them a +1d10 damage bonus against enemies who haven't yet
acted this combat. Anyone with this trait really likes rolling high for
initiative.

**Daggerburg Tactics** replaces the generic Goblin Tactics trait. When a
creature with this is missed by a melee attack, the attacker grants combat
advantage to them in this next turn. Daggerburg goblins are more aggressive than
usual.

### Battle Worg

The Daggerburg goblins raise a distinctive breed of giant wolf for use as mounts
in battle. Despite being called "battle worgs", they're not sapient like
standard worgs, and are a little weaker. Their mechanics are still similar,
though.

Battle Worgs are Large Natural Magical Beasts and Level 5 Brutes with 78 HP and
a speed of 8. Their **Frigthful Growls** acts as an aura (1) that inflicts a -1
to-hit penalty on enemies caught inside. Their mount trait is **Slavering
Lunge**, which lets the worg move half its speed as a free action when their
rider rolls initiative. Their reach 1 **Bite** damages and inflicts ongoing 5
damage (save ends).

A lot of the people who could use battle worgs as mounts in this entry are
higher level than them, but it's a simple enough task to level up the worgs to
match their riders if you want them to last longer in the fight.

### Daggerburg Ruffian

An experienced raider, this goblin is a Level 4 Soldier with 58 HP and a speed
of 5. It's armored in mail, wields a light shield and spear combo in melee, and
a light crossbow for ranged combat. It has both Combat Adept and Daggerburg
Tactics.

The **spear** and **crossbow** are used in basic attacks, and the spear can also
**trip up** an enemy, doing the same damage as a basic attack and knocking the
target prone.

Ruffians are perfect riders for the battle worgs we just saw.

### Daggerburg Theurge

Theurges seem to be goblin spellcasters with a witchy theme. They're Level 5
Controllers with 64 HP and both signature traits. They're listed as Medium, but
should be Small instead.

They fight in melee with **spiked clubs**, and once per encounter they can call
down a **Brimstone Rain** that works as an area burst 2 attack. It deals
immediate and ongoing fire damage (save ends), half on a miss.

Their most fun power, however, is the at-will **Slimy Transformation**. Ranged 5
vs. Fortitude, does no damage, but _turns the target into a frog_ (save ends)!
This is a mundane Tiny frog, not a giant variety. Frogged targets are considered
slowed, and can't use powers - not even basic attacks. The only limitation here
is that the theurge can't cast this on someone who's already transformed by it.

So yeah, they are sure to open up with Brimstone Rain and then stay away
applying the Transformation to as many PCs as possible while their buddies do
the actual damage.

### Daggerburg War Mage

Another mage, this one a more straighforward hobgoblin elemental adept. It's
Level 6 Artillery with 58 HP. They have Combat Adept but not Daggerburg Tactics.

War mages fight with their **staffs**, which also work as implements. At range
they can hit you with an at-will **Stabbing Flame** that does immediate and
ongoing fire damage, or with a recharge 5+ **Icy Stream** that does cold damage
and slides the target 3 squares.

### Daggerburg Slayer

A beefy hobgoblin with a big axe. It's a Level 6 Brute with 85 HP. It has Combat
Adept but not Daggerburg Tactics. Their **greataxe** is their sole attack, but
it has some riders: it deals +5 damage while the slayer is bloodied, and it
deals another +5 damage if the strike bloodies the target.

Once per encounter the slayer can use its **Hobgoblin Resilience** to
immediately roll a save against an (save ends) effect as a reaction.

### Daggerburg Zealot

A bugbear trained with the glaive. Not one of the Mistmanes, those are
below. Zealots are Level 7 Skirmishers with 78 HP. They have Combat Adept.

The **glaive** is a solid Reach 2 basic attack and their **Mobile Attack**
ability allows them to shift half their speed and make a glaive attack at any
point during the movement. Once per encounter, when an enemy within 5 squares of
the zealot attacks one of its allies, the zealot can use **Dagerburg Zealotry**
shift up to 5 squares and hit the attacker with its glaive as a reaction.

A very mobile combatant with a reach weapon, who will use both of these things
to get at the party's back lines and mess up their squishies.

### Daggerburg Captain

This hobgoblin officer probably serves directly under Delderosh. It's a Level 7
Soldier (Leader) with 78 HP. The captain is clad in mail and wields a bastard
sword and a shield.

The **bastard sword** makes attacks that damage and mark for a turn. While the
mark persists, the target also grants combat advantage. Once per encounter, and
once again after it's first bloodied, the captain can yell **Follow Me!** and
charge an enemy. Two allies within 5 squares of its starting position can then
make a free charge against different enemies.

The captain has none of the signature traits from the start of this
section. Instead, it has an improved version of Hobgoblin Resilience named
**Daggerburg Resilience**, which works the same but can be applied either to the
captain or to an ally within 5 squares of it.

### Daggerburg Reaper

A hobgoblin who specializes in the use of the scythe. It's a Level 7 Lurker with
64 HP. The **scythe** can make decent basic attacks, and once per encounter the
reaper can use a **Blinding Sweep** that targets a Close Burst 1, deals heavy
damage, and blinds for a turn on a hit. A miss does half damage.

As a move action, the reaper can **Stalk**, which allows it to shift 1 square
and then move its speed. If it ends in a space at least three squares from any
other creatures, it becomes invisible until the start of its next turn or until
it makes an attack.

These abilities are interesting but the reaper has no powers that specifically
exploit them. It's a very skirmishery lurker.

### Mistmane Bugbear

These bugbear adepts received their name from the constant misty aura they
project, which disrupts teleportation and can confuse enemies' minds. Their
claws are laced with necromantic energy. They're Large Natural Humanoids and
Level 8 Elite Soldiers with 172 HP.

They have Combat Adept, and their **Arcane Mist** aura (2) prevents creatures
from teleporting as mentioned above. Their basic attack is a **Rake** with their
claws, which damages and marks for a turn. If a marked enemy makes an attack
that doesn't target the bugbear, they take 5 necrotic damage. As elites, they
can use this for **Double Attacks**.

Once per encounter as a minor action they can use the **Bewildering Mist**
ability, attacking the Will of every enemy in a Close Burst 1. A hit dazes the
target for a turn.

Mistmanes are excellent front-line fighters, able to keep two PCs marked at
once.

### Kabo Bomble

One of the Daggerburg gang's champions, Kabo Bomble is a giant of a goblin,
twice as tall as the typical member of the species. This puts him well into
Medium size. He fights with a morningstar in one hand and a spiked gauntlet in
the other. Kabo is a Level 9 Brute with 116 HP. He has both Combat Adept and
Daggerburg Tactics.

Kabo's **morningstar** and **gauntlet** do about the same damage, with the first
being a basic attack and the second targetting Reflex and dazing for a turn on a
critical hit.

Twice per encounter, Kabo can use a **Furious Attack** ability to attack with
both weapons in a single action. If both hit the same target, it is dazed for a
turn.

Once per encounter, Kabo Bomble can **Roar** as a minor action, attacking the
Will of all enemies in a Close Burst 2 and inflicting a -2 defense penalty on a
hit (save ends).

### Warlord Delderosh

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-daggerburg-delderosh.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Delderosh is the leader of the Daggerburg Goblins, and is likely to be found
leading their biggest raids or at the center of Daggerburg itself surrounded by
his personal guard. This hobgoblin is a Level 10 Skirmisher (Leader) with 200
HP.

Delderosh's custom traits are **Ambush Leader**, which gives a +5 to the
Initiative rolls of every ally within 5 squares of him at the start of the
fight; and **Combat Advantage**, which gives him some bonus damage when he has
that against a target.

Delderosh carries a **spear** for fighting in melee and a **shortbow** for
ranged attacks. The spear attack allows him to shift 1 square as an effect and
it can be used to **Skewer** (recharge 5+), which deals the same damage as a
basic attack and inflicts ongoing 10 damage (save ends). As an effect, it also
makes the target grant combat advantage for a turn.

Finally, he has the same **Daggerburg Resilience** reaction power as the
Captains working under him.

The warlord is depicted riding a battle worg here and he would certainly benefit
from the thing's traits, but you'll likely need to increase the level of his
personal mount from the base 5. Everyone else in the encounter where he appears
should have Combat Adept to maximize the benefit they get from his initiative
bonus.

## Final Impressions

The Daggerburg goblins don't differ much in concept from the "generic" band of
goblin brigands, but they're a very nice worked example of the trope, with
several memorable named NPCs. They also show us how to stretch classic
goblinoids into a threat that can keep PCs occupied for the whole of the heroic
tier.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
