---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Anakore"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

I have no idea if anakores appeared before. This is the first time I've read
about them.

## The Lore

Little is known about the origins of these creatures. Ancient tales speak of a
terror from beyond the sky that touched their ancestors, causing them to recoil
from the sun and seek shelter underground. Over time, these ancestors became
today's anakores.

Anakores burrow beneath the desert sands during the day, emerging at night to
hunt. They can feel the vibrations of prey passing overhead, and smell blood
spilled on the ground. They'll follow detected prey all day underground, waiting
for the sun to set so they can ambush their victims from below. When they
attack, anakores fight with their powerful digging claws and their paralytic
bites. They organize themselves into small bands led by the most accomplished
tracker, where each member has a well-defined role. Some lead the ambush and
draw the attention of the prey, some hurt and weaken it, and some drag it under.

I guess a lot of the time this prey is the local fauna, but anakores don't mind
attacking sapient travellers, and judging from what the book says seem to prefer
it. They don't have any visible sexual dimorphism, and rumor has it that they
reproduce by dragging some of their sapient victims to weird cocoons under the
sands. There, the victims are transformed into more anakores. No one knows what
criteria they use to select new candidates.

## The Numbers

Anakores are Medium Aberrant Humanoids, which means they're sapient. They have
low-light vision and Tremorsense 5, plus a ground speed of 5 with Earth Walk and
a burrow speed of 6 on loose earth only. They communicate in Deep Speech.

Their signature traits are **Dune Diver**, which lets them charge while
burrowing, and **Sensitive to Light**, which gives them a -2 penalty to attacks
for a turn when they're exposed to direct sunlight or take radiant damage.

### Anakore Hunter

These are the ones who drag people under. They're Level 5 Lurkers with 48
HP. Their basic **claw** attacks grab the target on a hit, and on their next
turn they can choose to either bite the victim or drag them under.

The **bite** targets a grabbed creature and deals a bit less damage than the
claws, but slows (save ends). An already slowed target is instead immobilized
(save ends). **Drag Under** (melee 1 vs. Fortitude) can target either
immobilized or grabbed creatures. It deals more damage than the claw, inflicts 5
ongoing damage and removes the target from play (save ends both). When the
effect ends the target reappears at its previous position or on the closest
unoccupied square. And even them they're still immobilized (save ends), so the
hunter can try to drag them under again right away instead of having to bite.

### Anakore Render

This is the one that hurts the prey and makes it more vulnerable to the
others. Renders are Level 7 Lurkers with 96 HP and a ground speed of 7 instead
of the usual 5.
