---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Dracolich"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

A Dracolich is what you get when a dragon decides to perform the unspeakable
rites of lichdom. Due to the vagaries of alphabetical ordering, we get to look
at them before we dive into the huge "Dragon" entry. They're present on both the
Monster Manual and the Vault, though they're mixed in with the living dragons in
the later.

## The Lore

I simply must start this section by making a direct quote from the MM:
"Dracoliches are selfish, greedy, and interested only in amassing more power and
treasure." So, pretty much like standard dragons? Both books have a lot more
about them, I just thought that sentence in particular was funny.

Dragons are long-lived but not immortal, so a dragon might choose to become a
lich to escape death much like a human wizard would. It's also possible for a
dragon to be made into a dracolich against its will, usually by some sinister
cults looking to bag themselves a powerful servant.

Needless to say, dracoliches are pretty evil. The voluntary version of the
ritual requires the same sort of livelie awfulnesse that only true villains
would be willing to perform - if you weren't officially Evil before performing
it, you certainly are afterwards. The involuntary version leaves the dragon
under the control of the (also inevitably evil) group who performed it.

I suppose a dracolich who was turned involuntarily and manages to break free of
its controllers could be unaligned or even good depending on how it was in
life. Of course, if it was your typical evil chromatic then freedom won't do
much to improve its disposition.

Dracoliches aren't reliant on phylacteries at all. The involuntary ritual
produces one as the key to controlling the dracolich, so you actually have a
situation where the lich wants to destroy its own phylactery here. In either
case, destroying the dracolich's body slays it for good, with the control
phylactery shattering if it still exists when the monster dies.

The Monster Vault adds that lichdom makes dragons more scheming and manipulative
than they were in life. They'll develop intricate plans and conspiracies to
increase their own power, and establish large networks of minions and servants
to accomplish these goals. If your dragons already do that, then I guess
dracolichs are even more meddlesome. Or maybe they go after living dragons with
much less regard for diplomacy than usual, since it's likely they see themselves
as superior to their living brethren.

Dungeons and Dragons has never been a game to provide just one stat block for a
given type of dragon, and here this extends to the dracolich as well. The
Monster Manual has no less than three variants, and the Monster Vault has two
more. And they're all solos! I'll cover each book in its own section.

## The Numbers (Monster Manual)

The "basic" MM **Dracolich** is a Huge Natural Magical Beast (dragon,
undead). This is a perfect example of how the undead keyword is different from
the shadow origin! This dracolich is a Level 18 Solo Controller with 885 HP. It
has darkvision and trained Perception. It's immune to disease, fear, and poison,
has 30 necrotic resistance and 10 radiant vulnerability. It runs at Speed 8 and
flies at Speed 10 (but clumsily). Like all solo monsters, it has +5 to all saves
and 2 Action Points. Being a high-level MM monster, its attacks suffer pretty
heavily from the damage bug, so you'd need to fix that before using it.

Its basic attack is a Reach 3 bite that does physical damage, and extra necrotic
damage to stunned targets. It can also attack with a Recharge 5-6 breath weapon,
a Close Blast _9_ that targets Reflex. A hit does necrotic damage and stuns for
a turn. A miss still does half damage but doesn't stun. And either way the
targets lose any necrotic resistance they had (save ends).

You know I actually don't mind this breath having low damage so much. That's a
huge area and some pretty heavy riders. You might as well say every PC is
affected every time unless one of them is a ranger who likes to snipe from off
the map or something. Measuring the exact area of effect of the dracolich's
necrotic breath becomes more important if it has allies. This isn't a
party-friendly attack and even undead will be negatively affected by it.

This cloud of death isn't the only source of stuns for the dracolich. It also
has Frightening Presence, that draconic staple. This is an encounter power
that affects a Close Burst 10 (i.e, every PC) and targets Will. Targets hit by
the attack are stunned for a turn, and take a -2 penalty to attacks until the
end of the encounter.

If that isn't enough, it still has a couple of triggered actions. As an
interrupt when someone makes a melee attack against it, it can deploy a
Mesmerizing Glare. This attack against Will stuns for a turn on a hit, and
inflicts a -2 penalty to attacks for a turn on a miss. Since it's an interrupt,
either effect can preempt the attack that triggered it. Oh, and it's a Close
Blast 3, so it can end up stunning more people than just the attacker. And then
we have the other draconic staple, Bloodied Breath, which allows the dracolich
to recharge and use its breath immediately upon being bloodied.

The written tactics for it are to use the breath first, then enter melee and
spend an action point to use Frightful Presence. The last action point should be
saved for a tactical retreat - this guy is a mastermind, not a "fight to the
death" type.

Following this we have the **Blackfire Dracolich**, a bigger and badder
version. It's Gargantuan (the largest size category in 4e), and a Level 23 Solo
Controller with 1095 HP. It has all of the basic model's traits with numbers
increased due to level. Its necrotic resistance is 35, but its radiant weakness
is still at 10. The reach of its melee attacks is 4.

The Blackfire Dracolich has one extra attack on top of all the things from the
basic model: the titular Blackfire, a secondary breath weapon that affects a
Close Blast 5, hits _automatically_, does necrotic and ongoing fire damage, and
recharges on a 4-6.

To finish it off we have the **Runescribed Dracolich**, a yet more powerful
version. This one is a Level 29 Solo Controller with 1335 HP. It has everything
the Blackfire Dracolich has, and a few things more. Its necrotic resistance is
40, which I think is the highest resistance I've seen anywhere so far (not
counting complete immunities). It's "final boss" material for a campaign that
only reaches the mid-epics, and could be an exarch or lieutenant for an
undeath-focused final boss like Orcus.

This top-end variation has all of the Blackfire Dracolich's attacks, plus
Runescribed Retaliation. This is an interrupt that triggers when the dracolich
is targeted by a ranged attack. It allows the monster to make a very accurate
attack against the attacker's Will, and on a hit the monster can redirect the
incoming attack to any other target within 5 squares of it. The attacker still
has to roll to hit the new target, but they can't miss on purpose.

It appears that MM dracoliches in general are less focused on performing
multiple actions and more focused on denying the PC's actions, with this liberal
use of at-will stunning.

The sample encounter here is Level 20: a basic dracolich and a party of
high-powered yuan-ti. You can stop wondering about which sort of cult would want
their own dracolich lackey.

## The Numbers (Monster Vault)

The Monster Vault starts us off at a more humble place with the **Deathbringer
Dracolich**. It's Large, and a Level 12 Solo Controller with 492 HP. Like the MM
variants, it has trained Perception and Darkvision. It's immune to disease and
poison, but not fear. It's necrotic resistance is 10, as is its radiant
vulnerability. It runs at speed 6 and flies clumsily at speed 8.

Like a living dragon, this dracolich has Action Recovery, which automatically
ends any dazing, stunning or dominating effects on the monster when it ends its
turn. It also can use its Mesmerizing Gaze (below) automatically on an
initiative of 10+its initiative result for the fight.

Its basic attack is a Reach 2 bite that does physical damage and ongoing
necrotic damage. It can instead make two Reach 2 Claw attacks, which slide the
target 2 squares even if they don't hit. Its breath weapon is a Close Blast 5
that targets Reflex, does necrotic damage and weakens (save ends). On a miss it
still does half damage and weakens for a turn.

The afore-mentioned Mesmerizing Gaze is a minor action Ranged 10 attack,
targetting Will and dominating (save ends) on a hit. On a miss it does 15
psychic damage if the target willingly moves closer to the dracolich before
the end of the target's next turn. Either way it slides the target 2
squares. Make sure to keep these effects in mind, because this attack is going
to happen _a lot_.

Then we have the **Dracolich Doomlord**, a Huge Level 22 Solo Controller with
840 HP whose power level is on par with the living elder dragons from this
book. Its necrotic resistance increases to 15, and is speed to "8, fly
10". Everything else is comparable to the basic model aside from level-based
number increases.

The doomlord gains a new passive trait: the Aura of Doom has a radius of 3 and
prevents any enemies inside from regaining HP or gaining temporary HP. Yikes!
Its breath weapon regains the ability to remove necrotic resistance (save ends)
as an effect, but its mesmerizing gaze loses the "take damage if you come
closer" curse on a miss. Here's someone who will try to keep the whole party
within the aura of doom at all times, and likely go for the healers first. It
has enough HP to eat a few opportunity attacks from defenders in order to do
that.

## Final Impressions

Dracoliches feel somehow scarier than the Tarrasque, even though they're lower
level. Fighting the MM variants in particular seems like it would be pure agony
for the players, with the stuns flowing freely. I can see why they switched to a
more multi-action solo stat block for the MV. I can also see why the MV lumped
them in with the other dragons. As we're about to see, they're really very
similar, and fill the Controller niche that was missing from lineup of living
chromatics.
