---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Renegade Red Wizard"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

Thay is an island nation located somewhere outside of regional map. It's ruled
by wizards who like to wear red.

Now, if you're only familiar with them from the Neverwinter Nights games, like I
am, you might have a somewhat ambiguous view of them. Sure, sometimes a Red
Wizard of Thay will be involved in evil schemes elsewhere in the world, but
#NotAllRedWizards are evil. There's even a Lawful Neutral companion in NWN2: Mask
of the Betrayer who will praise the orderliness of her nation while helping you
save the world.

I'm here to tell you that this view is wrong. The Red Wizards of Thay are
basically necromantic Nazis. Maybe this is something that changed between
editions, or maybe it's just that the NWN games were trying to be the same sort
of "clever" devil's advocate that says you can be a Chelish Hellknight in
Pathfinder and not be evil.

Thayan society values magic power above all else, so the Red Wizards are at the
top. Their schools focus heavily on necromancy, and the use of undead labor is
widespread. Their rulers are a council of liches led by one Szass Tam, one of
those annoying epic villains the Forgotten Realms are famous for. Most of the
population thinks this state of things is natural. Dissidents get zombified.

If you are a PC with the Renegade Red Wizard theme, you too grew up thinking all
of this was normal. You were pretty happy when your aptitude for magic was
discovered and you were admitted into one of the island's prestigious Red Wizard
academies. You remained happy right up until your best friend made a tiny
mistake during a ritual, and your teacher was so enraged that he killed your
friend on the spot. Then he had the body brought in to be reanimated by your
class as a group project. You were completely horrified, but you looked around
you and saw that everyone else _still thought all of this was normal_.

You ran away the first chance you got, as fast as your feet could carry you, and
went as far as Neverwinter before you stopped and took stock of your
situation. You decided to stick around and help the reconstruction of the city.

And then you discovered the Thayans were _here_, doing something unspeakably
evil somewhere in the Neverwinter Wood. You're done running. Time to do
something about these dang wizard Nazis.

This theme has no ancestry restriction, but its features only make sense for the
Essentials Wizard (also known as the Mage). The associated background skills are
Bluff, Heal, Religion, and Stealth. That seems like a lot, but it's still
balanced because you still only get to pick one of them to boost or add to your
class list.

## Features

This theme has no optional powers, but it makes up for that with extra
features. To understand how they work we must first know a bit about the
Essentials Wizard (known as the Mage from here on out).

Mages specialize in specific schools of magic as they level up. Heroes of
the Fallen Lands has three of then: Enchantment, Illusion and Evocation. Each
has an Apprentice, Expert, and Master feature, and a set of paragon-tier powers.

At levels 1 and 4 the mage chooses an Apprentice feature for two different
schools (one at each of those levels). At levels 5 and 8, they gain Expert
features for these same schools. At level 10, they gain the Master feature for a
single school and go on to pick paragon-tier powers for that same school as they
level up even further.

In olden times, Red Wizards were known for specializing in a single school to a
greater degree than most others. Nowadays, they always pick "necromancy", but
the Renegade PC has used their teachings to pick something else. So one of their
magic schools is Enchantment, Illusion or Invocation like a normal mage, but the
other is replaced by the extra features of this theme. The other features
usually relate to your experience hiding from and fighting your former
compatriots.

Starting from level 1, every time you attack from hiding with an arcane power
and miss every target, you remain hidden. Enemies can still try to make
Perception checks to find you, but you're no longer automatically revealed.

At level 4, you don't get to make a second Apprentice choice. Instead, when one
of your spells causes a save-ends effect, the target has a -2 penalty on those
saves.

At level 5, you can switch one of your prepared spells at the end of a short
rest once per day, as long as its from your specialist school. Usually Mages can
switch spells only at the end of a long rest. Spell-switching is less of an
issue in 4e than it was earlier, in my experience, so this isn't a very large
benefit.

At level 8, you don't get your second Expert choice. Instead you gain a +2
bonus to Bluff and Intimidate. The bonus is untyped, which is the least they
could to do compensate for the lack of another Expert magic feature.

At level 10, you gain an extra +1 (untyped!) bonus to attack any Red Wizard or
undead creature that grants comabt advantage to you.

## Impressions

Out of all these features, I think the level 4 one is the best. Since wizards
are controllers, a very large number of their powers are of the save-ends type,
so a -2 penalty to all enemy saves is huge. The attack bonus against all undead
is also pretty cool, but it comes in very late in the campaign.

If a non-Mage picked this theme, I'd rejigger is so they still get the Level 1
and 10 features as written, but get the Level 4 feature in place of the Level 5
one.

Now, about the story: As I mentioned previously, the Red Wizards are responsible
for the volcanic eruption that half-destroyed Neverwinter. Their original
intention was to _fully_ destroy it and use the deaths to power the Super
Necromantic Fortress they were building in the Neverwinter Wood. A band of novel
protagonists foiled them 30 years ago, but now they have returned to the site of
the incomplete fortress to try and finish the process. This is what the Renegade
has found clues about.

Therefore, I would be inclined to include an NPC Renegade if the party has none,
just so they can point the PCs towards the Red Wizards. Punching them would as
satisfying as punching Hellknights and Nazis.
