---
layout: post
title: "Where I Read the 4e Monster Manual: Azer"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---

To close ou the As, we have another classic, the Azer. I remember them from D&D
3.5 as basically dwarves that are on fire. Here we get a tiny bit more
background tying them to the Fourth edition cosmology.

## The Lore

Way back at the dawn of time, dwarves were all slaves to the giants. Eventually
they rebelled agains their masters and escaped into the world, where they would
proceed to build their own civilization. Well, most of them did.

Those that stayed behind were mutated by fire giants and transformed into
azer. Some of those broke free later, but some remain enslaved as laborers and
guards. So if you're riding the castle of the fire giant king, you're going to
run into troops of azer before you start seeing giants. They're Unalighed and
about as intelligent as regular dwarves, so you might be able to negotiate with
them and foment rebellion.

Azer don't have a Monster Vault counterpart.

## The Numbers

As inhabitants of the Elemental Chaos, 4e Azer are paragon-tier opponents. We
get several stat blocks for them here. The signature Azer traits are Resist Fire
30 and Warding Flame: each enemy that starts their turn adjacent to 2 or more
azer takes 5 fire damage. They are _not_ particularly vulnerable to cold.

The **Azer Warrior** is a Level 17 Minion, useful for padding out encounters
involving fire giants or azer regulars. They attack with warhammers that do fire
damage and a tiny bit of ongoing fire damage.

The **Azer Foot Soldier** is a regular version of the warrior, a Level 14
Soldier with 141 HP. his equipment and attack (singular) are pretty much
identical, aside from having normal rolled damage for their level.

The **Azer Rager** is a totally metal Level 15 Brute who has 181 HP. She attacks
with spiked gauntlets that menace with spikes of fire (and cause ongoing fire
damage). When bloodied, she can call upon Chains of Flame, which cause fire
damage in a Close Burst 5 around her and immobilize enemies who were already on
fire from other attacks.

The **Azer Taskmaster** is a Level 17 Controller (Leader) attacks with a scourge
that menaces with spikes of fire (and does a mix of physical and fire
damage). Once per turn it can cause a nearby enemy who just took fire damage
from any source to also take ongoing fire damage. This guy is probably an
exception to the negotiation bit - he likely gets special privileges in exchange
for keeping the other azer in line.

The **Azer Beastlord** is a Level 17 Soldier (Leader) or, in other words, a
hellhound wrangler. His basic attack is a battleaxe that mixes physical an fire
damage, and marks on a hit. The real attraction here are his other powers,
though. He can make an allied elemental beast (read: hellhound) recharge one of
its encounter or daily powers as an _at-will_ minor action, and once per
encounter he can hand out a free attack to every allied elemental beast who can
see him and is flanking an enemy.

The suggested encounters are:

- Level 14: One pair of azer footsoldiers and one pair of salamanders. These
  poor sods escaped the fire giants only to be enslaved by salamanders.

- Level 15: 6 warriors, 2 ragers, and one immolith demon. _These_ poor sods have
  it even worse.

- Level 17: One taskmaster, one beastlord, 8 warriors and 1 firebred
  hellhound. These could be free azer! You should totally swap the warriors for
  another 2 hellhounds.


## Final Impressions

Dwarves on fire. The foot soldier is a bag of HP with a single melee attack, so
it's quite boring on its own. The others are a bit more interesting, though I
feel like the taskmaster should have a ranged attack of some sort. In fact, the
azer lineup in this book is very lacking in ranged firepower, so they need some
external artillery support. They also suffer from the classic "fire monster in a
fire dungeon" problem, where any smart party will prepare themselves to resist
most of their attacks.

The most fun of the lot is definitely the Beastlord, particularly when
associated with a pack of hellhounds or even other, _non-fire_ elemental
beasts.

If your previous exposure to Azer was the low-level stat block in the 3.x
monster manual, seeing them as mid-to-late paragon tier creatures might be a bit
jarring. Their abilities are simple enough that you could comfortably reduce
their level by 10 or so to make them appropriate for heroic tier games without
changing anything of their abilities.
