---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Monster Manual/Vault: Banshrae"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---

A Banshrae is a Medium fey humanoid that looks like the love child of an elf and
a praying mantis. Tall and rail-thin, they have alabaster skin, long clawed
fingers and triangular mouthless faces with insectile eyes. I don't know if
banshraes come from earlier editions, or if they are new. They're only on the
Monster Manual.

## The Lore

Banshraes are Unaligned, and the ones we see in this entry have an Int of 14 and
a Charisma of 20. Nevertheless, the text repeatedly describes them as cold,
sinister and egotistical, with a tendency to view other sapients as sources of
amusement or loot rather than as people. The nicest among them are pranking
tricksters, and the bad apples are sadistic serial killers. I guess you don't
need to officially swear allegiance to the cosmic principle of Evil to be an
asshole.

Having no mouth, banshraes communicate via telepathy. I guess hey either don't
need food at all or feed on someting like ambient magic. One interesting factoid
is that banshraes love singing and the sound of wind instruments, despite having
no way to sing or play themselves. Stories speak of people who managed to avoid
being pranked/murdered by a banshrae by singing or playing tunes to it.

## The Numbers

Banshraes have speed 8 and low-light vision. Their other signature trait is
actually a piece of signature gear: a blowgun and darts, which they can use
despite having no mouth. I picture them doing a fancy palm strike on one end of
the blowgun to fire a dart out of the other.

The **Banshrae Dartswarmer** is level 11 artillery with 89 HP, who fights
unarmed in melee but whose specialty is firing poisoned blowgun darts that daze
and inflict a penalty to attacks. Every so often (recharge 3-6) then can go
"full auto" and fire a dart flurry with the same effect at anyone in a close
blast 5. That basically hits the entire PC party unless they're _very_ spread
out.

The **Banshrae Warrior** is a level 12 skirmisher with 121 HP who can also use a
blowgun but who focuses on its praying mantis kung-fu. It can shift 1 square as
a minor action after hitting with a melee attack, and it has two of those: a
basic slam, and the Staggering Palm. Staggering Palm stuns the target for a
turn, but only recharges after the banshrae uses Mantid Dance.

Mantid Dance is a move action, and lasts a turn. While in effect, it gives the
banshrae warrior +2 to all defenses (okay) and makes _all ranged attacks
automatically miss it_ (jeepers creepers!). Oh, and they do increased damage if
they move far enough during their turn. Having good defenders and solid melee
strikers is a must when fighting these fey.

The suggested encounter is level 12: 2 dartswarmers, 1 warrior, 1 ettin
spirit-talker and 1 iron gorgon (of the bull-looking kind). I'm guessing these
aren't the "nice" banshraes.

## Final Impressions

I don't think I'm entirely sold on the "heartless serial killer" presentation,
but the mechanics inspire me to do a Five Venoms kung-fu storyline with a
banshrae dojo as the villains.
