---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Fell Court"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-fell-court.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

We just looked at a faction of Arkhosian revivalists, and now we're looking at
an example of their Turathi counterparts.

## The Lore

Even long after the fall of Bael Turath, tieflings still have to contend with
the suspicions and prejudice of others. You could argue such suspicion was
warranted right after that fall, since the people who became the first tieflings
had all been members of the Turathi elite who practiced diabolism and therefore
were quite nasty. Their descendants however were just born that way and are as
varied in their moral outlook as any sapient other sapient people. It is wrong
to expect them to be scheming diabolists just because of their looks.

And then you have people like the Fell Court. They're a group of tieflings based
on Fallcrest who want to rebuild Bael Turath and make it great again. Yes, that
phrasing is very deliberate on my part and is meant to say they're
villains. Their leader is one Melech Ambrose, a self-proclaimed general and
visionary who can probably trace his ancestry very precisely to a specific noble
lineage.

Despite all his claims, Ambrose acts more like a petty crime lord than as a
would-be ruler. His group's current activities are all aimed at filling their
"war chest" so the "real" takeover can begin. They have only recently stepped up
their operations, and though the Lord Warden has heard rumors, his men have so
far failed to turn up any concrete information about the Court.

Ambrose himself has a public life as a successful trader and contacts among
several members of Fallcrest's high society. He uses this as cover to run a
modest black market operation that enjoys the favor of many of the city's
poorest residents, since they operate in the slums and provide some of the
support and security the city's government can't or won't get them.

Most of the Court's operating budget comes from Melech Ambrose's criminal
enterprise. They've stepped up their recruitment efforts, and are setting up
caches of weapons and supplies for a future takeover of Fallcrest. The money
also sees good use gathering information about the city's defenses and blackmail
material for use against its officials.

As you would expect from such a fan of old Bael Turath, Melech is a diabolist,
and his dealings have got him a measure of supernatural support from infernal
patrons. This include control over a large pack of Felldrakes, a species of
vicious drakes that used to be bred in Bael Turath.

Recruitment happens through a couple of layers of deception. The Court stages a
"false flag" attack on a potential candidate, and then swoops in for the
rescue. A member of the "rescue team" befriends the target and then the Court
slowly brings them into the group while probing their potential and loyalty to
the Turathi cause. A member who looks like a good fit gets contacted by an
underboss, who gives them a "trial by fire" mission that consists of committing
a crime suited to their abilities that also advances the interests of the
Court. Those who prove the extent of their skill and loyalty by successfully
performing this mission are made full members of the Court. Those who reveal
themselves incompatible end up murdered in a way that points to one of the
Court's rivals.

All of that is for tieflings. Non-tieflings never really progress beyond the
stage of "disposable tool".

Melech has also heard of the Iron Circle, an Asmodeus-worshiping mercenary
company from the south who is entering the Vale through the Harkenwold
region. He believes he can enter an alliance with the circle, offering his Fell
Court's services as spies and saboteurs and using the Circle's military might to
conquer the Vale so they can rule together. Though he has yet to hear back from
them after making his initial diplomatic overtures, he's absolutely sure they
will be successful. This belief may lead him to act rashly.

## The Numbers

All of our stat blocks here are for tiefling members of the Fell Court. As such
they all have Low-Light Vision and Resist Fire 5. They tend to me at low-to-mid
Heroic levels, making them appropriate as your group's first "urban intrigue"
antagonists in Fallcrest.

Let's look at them in order of level.

### Fell Court Ruffian

Ruffians are the some of the lowest-ranking members of the Court, individuals
who probably have not undergone their trial by fire yet. They're Level 2 Minion
Brutes. They fight with **clubs** that deal half damage on a miss, and have a
**Dances with Drakes** ability that allows them to make a free attack against an
enemy that has just been hit by a drake ally.

### Fell Court Creep

The same ranking as a Ruffian, but sneakier. Creeps are Level 3 Minion
Skirmishers. Their basic attack is a **Dazing Dagger** that damages and dazes
for a turn, and when they're missed by an attack **Fiendish Shift** allows them
to shift 1 square and deal 3 fire damage to the target.

### Fell Court Blackheart

A seasoned Court operative, combining mundane stealth training with a side of
infernal magic. They're Level 2 Lurkers with 37 HP.

Blackhearts fight with **Deadly Sickles** that deal necrotic damage, and can
spend their action to assume a **Smoke Form** instead of attacking. While in
smoke form, they can't attack or be attacked, and can pass through and occupy
other creatures' spaces. It can revert as a free action, or when it drops to 0
HP (from ongoing damage or something).

If the blackheart starts its turn in smoke form, it can use a **Sly Attack** to
target Reflex and deal about double the damage of a basic attack, half on a
miss. It can also use this power without turning to smoke, but it doesn't do
double damage then.

They can use the tiefling's standard **Infernal Wrath** power to inflict a bit
of fire damage on someone who just hit them, and when they're reduced to 0 HP
they can delete a healing surge from an enemy they can see before dropping.

If the blackheart damages an enemy that was granting combat advantage to it,
they stop that enemy from spending healing surges (save ends).

### Fell Court Underboss

This veteran Court member has proven to be loyal enough to be promoted, and is
now in charge of recruiting new members and sending them on jobs. It's a Level 3
Soldier with 47 HP and the Leader keyword.

The underboss is a **Drake Wrangler**, and gives Resist Fire 5 and a +2 bonus to
the AC of any drakes adjacent to it. It also projects a **Hellbound** aura (1)
that deals 5 fire damage to any creature that leaves it. Its **bastard sword**
strikes kind of skip the whole marking business. A target hit by the sword
suffers 5 fire damage if it doesn't target the underboss with an attack during
their next turn.

They can also use the sword in a **Diabolical Strike** that deals fire damage
and, if the attack was made with combat advantage, prevents the target from
shifting for a turn. **Infernal Wrath** rounds out the tiefling's arsenal.

Underbosses will always be in a tight formation with a pack of drakes, and will
seek to stay adjacent to a PC. Scattering those drakes might be a useful tactic,
since they'd take damage from Hellbound.

### Fell Court Hellmage

An underboss-rank Court member who prefers to rely more on magic than on
swords. It's Level 4 Artillery with 42 HP and the Leader keyword. Its aura of
**Drake Regeneration** (3) causes any bloodied drake ally inside to recover 5 HP
at the start of their turns if they have at least one HP left.

Hellmages fight with **daggers** in melee and shoot **Infernal Bolts** at
range. These deal both immediate and ongoing fire and radiant damage. Infernal
Wrath works as standard for them, and when they drop to 0 HP they use **See you
In Hell** to fire off one last infernal bolt without provoking opportunity
attacks.

### Melech Ambrose

The big boss is a unique Level 5 Skirmisher with 68 HP and the Leader
keyword. As a regular, Melech will always have plenty of bodyguards and
felldrakes with him. He projects two auras: **Bloodthirsty** (radius 1) makes
all enemies inside grant combat advantage; and **Drake Fervor** (radius 3) gives
drake allies inside a +2 bonus to damage and to saves.

Melech himself fights with a **scimitar**, which can be used for basic attacks
or **Fiendish Strikes** that allow him to shift 2 squares before or after the
attack, and, if made with combat advantage, daze for a turn. He can also **hurl
flame** to strike at range, dealing fire damage. Infernal Wrath works as normal
for him.

## Final Impressions

I think it's a bit unfortunate that the Fell Court lives up to the bad
reputation tieflings have, but it does give heroic PC tieflings an extra reason
to fight them. The first time I read this entry, I thought it was odd that they
went into that much detail about their recruitment process, but it's a perfect
ready-made story hook to get one of those heroic PC tieflings involved with
them.

Any fight against Fell Court members should absolutely include a couple of fell
drakes at least. Another thing I hadn't noticed until now is how central drakes
are to their whole flavor - every stat block here has some interaction with
drake allies. A "final battle" encounter against Melech, an Underboss, a
Hellmage and a troop of drakes will have the latter punch above their weight
class with bonuses to AC, damage, saves, and regeneration.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
