---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Evernight Overview"
tags:
     - dnd4
     - lets-read
     - neverwinter
---

Evernight is Neverwinter's reflection on the Shadowfell, but it's also a city in
its own right, inhabited by a very large number of undead and undead-adjacent
people (cultists, necromancers, and the like). This book doesn't go too deep
into its history, but it does give me the impression Evernight has existed for a
long time. It was probably described in a previous edition when the Shadowfell
was just "the plane of Shadow".

Evernight is ruled by a Tribunal composed by its most influent citizens, all of
whom are ghouls and ghasts who worship Orcus and his exarch Dorensain. The
Tribunal makes the laws and settles disputes. It does the latter by deciding who
is right and eating the loser.

The city is very dangerous for living mortals who aren't citizens, though it's a
bit _less_ dangerous than you'd think. Only its vampire and ghoul inhabitants
feel the need to feed on the living, and since the ambient energies of the
Shadowfell help sustain them this happens much less often than it would in the
world. Mortals and undead alike can apply for citizenship. Mortal citizens gain
legal protection from random attacks on the street, though they should probably
keep their token of citizenship within easy reach at all times. Living merchants
who pass through the city on the way to other locations can also acquire tokens
of safe passage.

The legal status of a mortal who doesn't have any of that can best be summed up
as "fresh meat", but even that isn't an automatic death sentence. Undead who see
the living brazenly walking down the streets of Evernight tend to assume they
belong there, and will only challenge that assumption if given reason to be
suspicious. Such as when the "tourists" make horrified faces at the deeply
fucked up stuff that happens in the city's routine unlife.

There are no official portals between Evernight and Neverwinter, but the planar
membrane separating the two is awfully thin and becomes fully permeable in
certain places known as "dusk crevices". These crossings link a place in
Evernight to its corresponding worldly location, which is always in dim light or
darkness. Some are fixed, some temporary or mobile. They're the true cause of
most spooky stories about disappearances in Neverwinter since before the
Spellplague. Mortals who fall through these crevices into Evernight make up a
significant portion of the diet of its ghoul and vampire population.

Despite its (literally!) ghoulish culture and society, Evernight is a major
Shadowfell trade hub, so it often sees passing caravans that link it to other
settlements in the plane. One of the trade routes passing through here is the
Shadowfell Road, a mystical path that has a ritual component. It only exists if
approached and traversed in a very specific way. The Thayans use it to supply
the Dread Ring, and the Tribunal allows them to use it for that purpose because
the Thayans pay them in _people_. A similar arrangement allows the Netherese to
maintain an embassy in the city and use their own share of trade and supply
routes.

Part of the reason the Tribunal accepts these deals is that both factions
represent powerful nations who are very adept at necromancy, but the ghouls
still draw the line at permitting hostilities within city limits. Evernight is
neutral territory, and violating this edict is one of the things that would
cause the Tribunal to take drastic action against the rule-breaker. In practice
that means conflict within the city takes the form of sordid spy stories of
intrigue and assassination.

The city did suffer some changes during the cataclysm. A reflection of the
Chasm, known locally as the Demon Pit, opened up in the corresponding Shadowfell
coordinates. And while the eruption of mount Hotenow was a quick affair in the
world, its shadowy counterpart continues to expel a slow and steady stream of
lava that flows through the equivalent of the Neverwinter River's bed. All of
the other horrific stuff we'll see in the following posts was already there
before that.

## Impressions

Evernight comes as a bit of a surprise to me, since I think it was only
mentioned in one place in the book before this section and that mention didn't
hint at the full scope of the thing. I'm guessing old FR hands already know all
about it, though.
