---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Mind Flayer"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Mind flayers are one of those monsters that are so iconic to D&D they're not
covered by the D20 license. They've been in the game since AD&D 1st Edition, and
are present in both the Monster Manual and the Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Mind flayers, or illithids, are tentacle-faced humanoids who possess incredible
psychic powers and use them to feed on sapient brains. They came from the Far
Realm long ago. Before they arrived in the world, they had a great
dimension-spanning empire whose experiments were responsible for the creation of
the Gith peoples as we know them today. That empire was torn down when their
slaves rebelled.

Some versions of mind flayer lore assert that they come from a distant _future_,
having travelled back in time to ensure their empire rises and to prevent its
fall. A necessary step in this plan would be to turn the world into another
region of the Far Realm.

Your typical mind flayer is a solitary, megalomaniacal villain bent on total
world domination, who surrounds itself with large numbers of thralls to act as
its hands and eyes to enact is elaborate plans on whatever society they're
targetting. That doesn't mean the illithid is a coward! Should see the need to
get into a fight personally, it will do so without hesitation. There's no limit
to the number of thralls a single illithid may control - the process of creating
them involves brain surgery, not active psychic domination. So those
organizations may be quite large, and composed of a mix of thralls and willing
(or ignorant) collaborators.

Sometimes, several mind flayers with similar goals will work together, though
you probably can't call their relationship "friendly". In the deep Underdark you
can find large illithid cities occupying huge caverns, where many of these
beings gather and surround themselves with veritable armies of thralls. These
cities are ruled by Elder Brains, huge masses of illithid neural tissue that
live inside briny vats.

Mind flayers start their lives as tiny tentacled tadpoles, who upon reaching a
certain level of maturity break into some poor sapient's skull, devour its
brain, and take over their bodies to mutate them into their adult form. In
illithid cities, these tadpoles live in the Elder Brain brine pool until someone
gives them a body.

Some versions of mind flayer lore mention that illithids who die in these cities
have their minds assimilated by the Elder Brain. They consider this to be the
perfect afterlife, believing their conscience lives on inside the Brain as part
of a collective. The truth is that while the process does make the Elder Brain
more powerful, it erases the conscience of the individuals joined to it.

5e tied all illithids a lot more closely to the Elder Brains, making them
practically into a hive mind, but this isn't true here. Individual, independent
illithids are exactly that. They don't need exceptional reasons to reject life
in an Underdark city - maybe their plans for world domination are just
incompatible ("I'm going to be the boss, not you"). This means that it's
perfectly possible to fight mind flayers in the surface withtout this being
necessarily tied to some Underdark conspiracy.

## The Numbers

The Monster Manual gives us 2 mind flayer stat blocks, and the Vault gives
us 3. All are Medium Aberrant Humanoids with Darkvision and a land speed
of 7. Every mind flayer can use a mind blast, grapple with its face tentacles,
and do creepy things to people's brains, though the exact effects vary.

All Mind Flayers understand Deep Speech, and can communicate via telepathy
regardless of language barriers.

### Mind Flayer Infiltrator (MM)

This is a Level 14 Lurker with 107 HP and trained Perception, as well as a host
of other thiefy skills.

It it has to fight, the infiltrator will probably open up with its **Mind
Blast** (Close Blast 5 vs. Will; recharge 6), which does psychic damage and
dazes on a hit (save ends). Mind flayers and thralls are immune to this power,
and the infiltrator itself is invisible to any dazed or stunned enemies (**Stalk
the Senseless**).

It will then attack the squishiest target with its **tentacles**, which grab the
target on a hit. After grabbing a victim, it will proceed with **Bore Into
Brain** (Melee 1 vs. Fortitude), something which it can also use against stunned
targets without grabbing them first. This does more damage than the basic
attack, and if it happens to reduce the target's HP to 0, the illithid eats its
brain and kills it instantly. No death saves for you!

As lurkers, they probably give preference to targets made vulnerable by the Mind
blast, and rely on their buddies and thralls to handle anyone who wasn't
affected. MM grab rules use either the Fort or Reflex as escape DCs, so you're
looking at a DC of 25 or 27 to get away from the infiltrator before it begins
eating your brain.

### Mind Flayer Thrall Master (MV)

This one is a Level 14 Elite Controller (Leader) with 260 HP. Its trained skills
are Arcana and Insight, so it's more of a scholar than a hands-on type.

That doesn't mean its defenseless! The thrall master fights in a way that's
somewhat similar to the MM's Infiltrator, but with stronger psychic powers. Its
**Mind Blast** (Close Blast 5 vs. Will; Recharge 5-6) works similarly but on a
critical hit it dominates instead of dazing (save ends).

The **tentacles** still grab on a hit, but they also hit dazed or stunned
targets automatically. The escape DC is 21, and while the thrall master can only
grab one person at a time, it can explicitly keep whipping other fools with its
tentacles after that.

Against the grabbed victim, the mind flayer can use **Manipulate Brain**
(vs. Fortitude), which does a big chunk of physical damage and stuns the target
until it's no longer grabbed! If this reduces the victim to 0 HP, the thrall
master has two choices: it can either devour the brain, killing the victim and
regaining 20 HP, or it can perform a field-expedient thrall surgery. This
restores the victim to 1 HP and dominates it until the thrall master is slain.

Since the dominated condition also leaves the victim dazed, this results in a
1-HP, zombie-like thrall, whose main defence is the fact that its companions
might not want to make it roll death saves. I imagine the illithid can do
further work out of combat to make these thralls act more normally.

### Mind Flayer Mastermind (MM)

This is essentially a more powerful variant of the Monster Vault's Thrall
Master. It's a Level 18 Elite Controller with 324 HP and training in Perception,
Arcana, Insight, Bluff and Intimidate.

It can use its **tentacles**, **Mind Blast** and **Bore Into Brain** abilities
in much the same way the thrall master can. Aside from the damage bug, the main
difference here is that thrall surgery restores the victim to half its maximum
HP, not just 1.

The mastermind can directly **Enslave** a creature (Ranged 10 vs. Will), an
attack which does no damage but dominates (save ends). Dominated creatures
become immune to the flayer's mind blast and gain a +5 bonus to Will while
within 10 squares of it. The victims it makes into thralls also gain this
benefit, by the way. Only one creature can be enslaved at a time, but as usual
it can have as many thralls as it can make.

The mastermind can also plan an **Illusion of Pain** in its victims (Area Burst
1 within 10 vs. Will; Enemies only; recharge 5-6) which does both immediate and
ongoing psychic damage and immobilizes (save ends).

When attacked, it can use **Craddle of the Elder Brain** (recharge 5-6) as an
interrupt, teleporting up to 20 squares. If it's targeted by a melee attack, it
can instead **Interpose Thrall**, an interrupt which redirects the attack to a
nearby thrall. That's definitely going to be its preferred option if it has
thralls nearby.

### Mind Flayer Unseen (MV)

A more powerful version of the Infiltrator, this one is a Level 18 Lurker with
126 HP. It's almost identical aside from the fixed damage, which makes its
**Extract Brain** attack truly frightening.

Instead of being invisible to dazed characters, the Unseen has a **Mental
Cloak** power which, as a move action, allows it to teleport its speed and
become invisible for a turn. It recharges whenever the Unseen is hit by an
attack.

### Concordant Mind Flayer (MV)

This Level 19 Controller (Leader) also works more or less like the Thrall
Master. It has 174 HP.

Its attacks are the usual trifecta of **Mind Blast**, **tentacles** and brain
manipulation, which in this case is named **Enthrall Brain** and only gives the
option of turning victims reduced to 0 HP into thralls. Like the Thrall Master,
its mind blast dominates on a critial hit.

The Concordant Mind Flayer's exclusive trick is **Shared Pain**, a reaction that
triggers when an ally within 5 squares takes damage from an attack. The illithid
can make one of its dominated victims in a Close Burst 5 take 20 psychic damage
which bypasses all of its resistances. This is sure to kill someone that's been
made into a thrall during the fight, since they'll only have 1 HP. It doesn't
prevent damage to the ally - it's more of a hostage situation. "Attack my
friends and your friends will suffer!"

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Mind flayers typically consider themselves superior to everyone else. Anyone
found working with them is probably a thrall or underling. I'd consider thralls
created outside of combat to be able to act normally instead of being considered
dazed.

It's possible for there to be a more congenial illithid that lives openly as a
scholar and gentlesquid in a community ruled by another species. The most likely
scenario in this case is that it lives and works alongside drow or duergar -
congenial doesn't mean _good_.

This gives us the two sample encounters from the MM:

- Level 14: 1 mind flayer infiltrator, 1 drider fanglord, 1 drow blademaster, 2
  drow warriors. Here's our gentlesquid.

- Level 18: 1 mind flayer mastermind, 1 mind flayer infiltrator, 3 grimlock
  followers, 2 war trolls. And here's a pair of more traditional illithids and
  their thralls.

Mind flayers are such an iconic monster that even WoTC thinks it's not D&D if
they're not in the books. And they do make excellent villains! You could have a
single individual be the ultimate villain in even a mid-Heroic tier adventure by
statting it up as a level 8 solo or the like.

Unlike what happens with the more naturalistic humanoids, this is one of the
rare instances where I'm fine with the books portraying them as almost
universally Evil. Good mind-flayers should be once-in-a-campaign events at most.
