---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Slaad"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Slaads already made their 4e debut in the first Monster Manual, and you can
check out the post I wrote on them [here][2]. This MM2 entry brings us a
lower-level, less-popular slaad type and an alternate mechanic for the horrific
slaad spawning cycle.

## Flux Slaad

Flux slaads seem to be the runts of the slaad family. They're weaker and
stupider than their relatives, they can't spawn, and their chaotic mutations are
at best a mixed blessing. Still, being weaker actually means they might have an
easier time slipping through a dimensional crack into the world, which they love
because it allows them to lord it over creatures even weaker than them.

Flux slaads who slip into the world often end up conquering bullywug tribes and
setting themselves up as their god-kings. Finding one of these on the throne
instead of the usual "slightly stronger frog-dude" can be an interesting
experience for cocky PCs.

### The Numbers

Flux Slaads are Medium Elemental Humanoids, and Level 9 Skirmishers with 98
HP. They have low-light vision, a ground speed of 7, and a teleport speed
of 2.

They fight with their **claws**. They can use those in a **Flux Rage** maneuver
that allows them to shift 2 squares and attack everyone they pass by during this
movement. This recharges when they're first bloodied. When they take damage from
an attack, they can shift 1 square as a reaction.

Nothing special so far, but now we come to the part that gives these slaads
their names. **Slaad Vulnerability Shift** should really have a name that
includes the word "flux" in it. This trait makes the slaad start out with random
vulnerability determined by a d6 roll: (1) cold, (2) fire, (3) lightning, (4)
necrotic, (5) psychic, (6) thunder. The slaad has Vulnerability 10 to that
damage type, but Resistance 5 to all the other table entries. Every time the
slaad takes damage from its current weakness, you roll the die again and
determine a new weakness.

## Slaad Spawn

Most slaads reproduce by infecting victims with a disease called Chaos Phage,
which causes slad tadpoles to gestate within the victim's flesh. The tadpole
grows and eventually erupts from its host, running away to mature
elsewhere. This was covered in the [MM entry][2] for Slaads.

A few of them are instead infected with a mutant strain of chaos phage, which
produces embryos in their _own_ flesh. These slaads are covered in gross giant
boils that pop when they're wounded, spawning miniature versions of
themselves. These spawn are both almost mindless and extremely aggressive, so
they often get used as weapons by their "parents". Should they survive the
circumstances of their birth, the spawn develop quickly and begin exhibiting
powers similar to those of an adult within days.

### The Numbers

Spawn are Small Elemental Humanoids, and Level 17 Minion Skirmishers. They have
low-light vision, a running speed of 5, and a teleport speed of 3. They attack
with **bites** and can also pounce using a **Chaotic Slam**. On a hit, they
damage and knock down the target. On a miss, they explode, dealing a bit of
damage in a Close Burst 1.

We also get stats for an elite template named **Slaad Spawner**, which can be
applied to any Large-sized regular slaad. This is turns the slaad into an elite
monster, and adds a **Spawn Slaad** reaction power that creates a new slaad
spawn whenever the spawner is hit by an attack. The new spawn appears adjacent
to the spawner, and acts right after the spawner's action. The template is
unusual in that it doesn't add additional HP to the regular monster. It does
bring a new minion into play every round, so maybe they thought this was enough
to make up for their lower HP. The spawner is worth double the experience of the
original slaad, but the spawned minions aren't worth any.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The flux slaad is kinda meh aside from its "weakness roulette" mechanic. The
roulette is interesting, but your party needs a lot of damage types (or a lot of
lucky d6 rolls) to keep it spinning. Otherwise it's going to stop on a type they
can't use, which means the slaad becomes resistant to the types they can. At
least you can always beat it up using physical damage, which means martial types
can end up being more effective against it than the casters.

Perhaps you could build a "puzzle boss" that had the same mechanic, plus some
way for the party to influence the result of the d6 roll.

Slaad spawn and the Spawner template bring another flavor of body horror to a
slaad fight. Since it seems spawn mature even faster than tadpoles, a spawner
presents an even nastier apocalyptic scenario than a normal slaad. It also
presents the GM with an excuse to throw lots of de-leveled slaads against a
heroic tier party, since those could be "immature" slaads that have grown past
the spawn stage but not developer all the way yet.

Our two sample encounters are:

- Level 8: A death shard, 3 flux slaads, and 2 slaad tadpoles. Likely brought to
  the world by a small Elemental or Abyssal rift.

- Level 17: 2 blue slaads, 1 green slaad, 8 slaad spawn. The blues and green are
  likely minding their little siblings and doing a typical slaad job of it. Note
  that the spawn are worth XP in this encounter, since they're not "produced" by
  an on-site spawner.




[2]: {{ "/2020/12/23/slaad.html" | relative_url }}
