---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Cave Fisher"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I believe Cave Fishers originated in AD&D, one of the many examples of "cave
ceiling fauna" in that edition. Your group might be on the lookout for
darkmantles, spiders and piercers, but they'll never see the cave fisher
coming. This is their 4e debut.

## The Lore

Cave fishers are nonsapient predatory arthropods about the size of an adult
human. They're entirely natural and mundane, by the standards of D&D. They hunt
by hiding in cave ceilings, and pulling prey from the ground using either sticky
strands or spear-like appendages.

As the name implies, cave fishers hang out underground. They prefer caves with
high ceilings and plenty of ledges, where they make their nests. They organize
themselves in loose collectives, and newly-mated pairs fly out to look for an
empty ledge to nest in.

The two varieties of cave fisher presented here aren't different species,
they're different sexes: anglers are female, and spikers are male. Anglers lay
eggs and watch the nest, hunting only when prey wanders nearby. Spikers range
farther out to look for food.

Cave fishers can't usually be tamed, but people tend to use meat-based bait to
lure them to caves they want protected and to distract them when passing through
those caves. Hobgoblins sometimes capture fisher eggs and train them from
hatching to serve as living artillery.

## The Monsters

Adult cave fishers are Medium Natural Beasts. Spawn old enough to be a threat
are Small. They have darkvision, a ground speed of 6 and a climb speed of 5 with
Spider Climb (5 and 4 for the spawn).

### Cave Fisher Spawn

Fisher spawn lead a stressful existence from very early on. A weak individual is
likely to be devoured by its siblings if they get hungry enough.

These Small spawn are Level 2 Minion Brutes. They attack with their **pincers**
and do extra damage against immobilized, restrained, or helpless targets.

### Cave Fisher Angler

This adult female tends to stick close to the nest, and rely on its ledge for
concealment. To hunt, she lowers a sticky filament to just above head height of
the passing prey, and snaps it around the prey's neck when they pass
underneath.

Anglers are Level 3 Lurkers with 37 HP. They have the **Sniper** trait, which
ensures they stay hidden if they make a ranged attack from concealment and miss.

This is useful because their **Filament Strangle** counts as a ranged attack! It
has range 5, targets Reflex, and though its initial damage is weak it pulls the
target 3 squares and restrains them (save ends). The pull can be vertical, and
the target can end that movement suspended in midair. This effect can be
sustained with standard actions in subsequent rounds, dealing automatic damage
to the target and pulling them again.

Aside from passing the save, there are few options from escaping the
filament. The victim can teleport or be teleported, which frees them
automatically; or one of their allies can the filament with an attack. The
filament has the same defenses as the angler, and hitting it frees the victim
but deals no damage to the beast itself.

If an angler does get into melee range of a PC, it can also use its basic
**pincer** attack, which does average damage and has no special effects.

It's likely that the PCs will only realize an angler is hunting them when the
first victim gets grabbed by a filament. And once that happens it can stay in
full cover atop that ceiling ledge until it has to peek out to try and grab
someone else!

### Cave Fisher Spiker

Spikers are the males of the species. Instead of producing a single strand of
filament, they can spit small tangles of it at greater ranges. These either
harden into spikes, or envelop a victim and begin contracting. The creature uses
these techniques to kill its prey and drag the carcass back to its nest.

Spikers are Level 3 Artillery with 37 HP. They have the same Sniper trait as the
angler, and a **Camouflage** trait that gives them +2 to defenses against ranged
and area attacks.

Their basic attacks are a **pincer** in melee, and a **filament spike** at
range. Those contracting filaments are represented by the **Filament Wrap**
attack (recharge 5+), which does no immediate damage but immobilizes the target
and inflicts 5 ongoing damage (save ends both).

Spikers tend to focus their fire on a single victim, since their instinct is to
kill it quickly and make off with the body.

### Cave Fisher Line Spiker

Hobgoblins that manage to capture a batch of cave fisher eggs like to use a
combination of magic and their ancient beast-taming techniques to turn them into
weapons of war. This results in a specimen that's less robust than a wild
spiker, but which can follow commands and fire in formation to support the
troops.

Like Spikers are Level 4 Minion Artillery. They have the usual **pincer** melee
attack, and their basic ranged attack is a **slowing spike** that does a bit of
damage and slows for a turn. Once per encounter they can use a **Toppling
Spike** that deals a bit more damage and knocks prone. Since they're minions,
this should be their first attack. Line spikers want to stay far away from the
front lines and will likely run away rather than engage the PCs in melee.

## Final Impressions

These cave fishers have enough unique mechanics to distinguish themselves from
other "ceiling fauna". Their low level makes it likely they'll be the first such
fauna the PCs meet. They can also inhabit the Underdark, but you might want to
give them a slight level boost if you want to place them there.

Since they're regulars, your PCs shouldn't run into lone fishers, at least not
as a full combat encounter. You can make an "all-wildlife" encounter with 2-3
mated pairs at once, or with 1 mated pair and other opportunistic underground
predators. Line spikers, of course, will always be accompanied by squads of
goblinoids including at least one beast tamer.
