---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Demogorgon (Part 2)"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Continuing from the [previous post][3], this time we'll be looking at Demogorgon's
Exarchs.

"Exarch" is the term D&D 4 uses for the "lieutenants" of a god or equivalent
entity. They might preside over a narrower slice of their master's portfolio, or
simply help run their operations in the world and other planes. Though
subordinate to someone else, exarchs are in no way weak: in the god-ranking
system used in previous editions, all of them would have ranked as anything from
demigods to intermediate deities themselves.

Orcus, which we looked at in the [Monster Manual let's Read][2], had one exarch:
Dorensain, the King of Ghouls. Demogorgon has two, described below.

## Kazuul

Kazuul used to be a human champion of Erathis a long time ago, and in her
service he carved many a swath of order through savage lands. I guess that in
the end something convinced him that this "carving a swath" business didn't make
him any different from the "savages" he claimed to oppose, and so he decided to
embrace that and pledge himself to Demogorgon.

The demon lord gave him a gift of size and strength, making him double in size
and become deformed by his over-developed demonic musculature. Kazuul now fights
in the name of Hethradiah, the "brutal but cunning" head, driving a horde of
demons before him to raid places in the Abyss and elsewhere in the multiverse. I
guess Kazuul is a big inspiration to those shrieking cultists we saw in the
[last post][3].

Being a former human, Kazuul fights with weapons. Being a former _adventurer_,
he's always on the lookout for better weapons. If he notices one of his
opponents is wielding something particularly sweet (say, a level 28+ magical
weapon), he will engage that opponent and ignore everyone else until he's taken
the weapon for himself. Otherwise, he will just focus on killing whoever is
closest and repeating that until there is no one else to kill.

This obsession with magic weapons stems in part from the fact that Kazuul used
to own a legendary sword named Gorgorin the Shatterer. He lost it in a battle
against Hainard, one of Pelor's exarchs. He's still sore about that, and looking
for a way to either get his sword back or to find a suitably awesome
replacement.

Kazuul's current weapons are quite awesome already: there's The Tooth of Grom, a
sword forged from the tooth of a fire titan lord, and The World Splitter, an axe
taken from Clangeddin Silverbeard, one of Moradin's Exarchs.

There's an ancient prophecy which proclaims that when Kazuul recovers Gorgorin,
he will use it to slay Demogorgon and then displace Yeenoghu as the lord of
gnolls. This prophecy has caused lots of infighting amongst demons, and there
have been several failed attempts by all factions involved to find the blade's
current hiding place.

### The Numbers

Kazuul is a Large Elemental Humanoid with the Demon tag, making him an official
demon. He's a Level 28 Elite Soldier with 528 HP. He has Darkvision and demonic
Variable Resistance 10, switchable 3x/encounter. He has ground and fly speeds of
5.

He has two basic attacks with his sweet magic weapons: the **Tooth of Grom**
(Reach 2 vs. AC) does physical damage and forces the target to make a melee
basic attack against a target of Kazuul's choice on a hit; the **World
Splitter** (reach 2 vs. AC) also does physical damage and inflicts a -4 AC
penalty (save ends). **Wrath of Kazuul** allows him to attack with both weapons
in a single standard action. Oh, and **Threatening Reach** allows him to make
opportunity attacks against any enemy he can reach.

If his enemies are beyond the reach of his blades, Kazuul can attack with
**Abyssal Flames** (area burst 3 within 20 vs. Reflex) at will, doing fire
damage on a hit. He also has a couple of handy spells for use when he gets
closer:

**Word of Doom** (close burst 3 vs. Will; encounter) does heavy physical damage
and allows Kazuul to crit against the targets on a natural roll of 15-20 (save
ends). This is scarier than it might sound for someone used to 3.x! In Fourth
Edition, criticals happen only on a natural 20. Only a handful of powers in the
entire game increase that range. Word of Doom is the only one I can think of
that widens it this much.

**Vortex of Blades** (close burst 3 vs. Reflex; enemies only; encounter) does
double the damage of a basic attack and stuns (save ends). Simple, but still
scary: stun (save ends) is a pretty serious condition.

## Thrarak

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-demogorgon-thrarak.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Thrarak's origins are closely tied to the mythological origns for [ettins][2]
that I wrote about during the first Monster Manual/Vault Let's Read. It starts
with Demogorgon fighting the god Amoth, who split his head in two. Before that
wound had even healed, the earth primordial Storralk ambushed him and tried to
take him down.

As the linked post says, Demogorgon defeated the would-be usurper handily, and
bound his broken but still-living form under his throne. It was Dagon who gave
him the idea for a bit of extra cruel punishment: using a ritual provided by
Dagon, Demogorgon caused the first Ettins to be born from Storralk's spilled
blood, and to scatter through the world. Each one contains a small fraction of
Storralk's essence, so whenever an ettin feels pain, Storralk's body feels it as
well.

One of those first ettins chose to stay at Demogorgon's side, and to seek his
favor by alternatively healing and cutting Storralk's flesh. This eventually got
his attention and Demogorgon made her one of his exarchs: Thrarak, the Flayed
Maiden.

Thrarak is specifically the Exarch of Ameul, the cunning head. She acts as
Demogorgon's emissary of vengeance, going after mortals and other entities that
have angered the Prince of Demons or those who have the potential to become
threats in the future. An expert torturer, she fights using twin lashes and
yelling streams of maddening lore that's dangerous to hear. She prefers to focus
on one opponent at a time, which will either be the target of her master's ire
or the closest available enemy. Once she chooses a target she will ignore any
other enemies to focus on it.

Legend has it that if Thrarak is slain and her heart burned upon Demogorgon's
throne, Storralk will finally break free of his prison. Freeing him could be an
important step in defeating Demogorgon himself.

### The Numbers

Thrarak is a Large Elemental Humanoid (giant) and a Level 26 Elite Brute with
596 HP. She has all the traits common to all Ettins: trained Perception,
darkvision, ground speed 8, and the Dual Brain and Double Actions traits
described in the [original ettin post][2].

Her basic melee attack is the **Lash of Ruin** (Reach 3 vs. AC) which does
physical damage, knocks prone, and dazes for a turn on a hit. She can sometimes
increase her rythm and perform a **Lashing Flurry** maneuver (close burst 3
vs. AC; recharge 5-6), dealing physical damage and dazing (save ends) all she
hits.

Once per encounter she can perform a **Howl of Madness** (Close Blast 5
vs. Will), which does psychic damage, slides the targets 3 squares, and forces
them to make a melee basic attack against a target of Thrarak's choice.

Those ettin traits I linked to are quite important to all of this: Thrarak has
two full turns per round and some resistance to restrictive conditions. She can
do a lot, which makes her dangerous to those enemies she's focusing on. She
should be put in charge of a monster team who can keep the remaining PCs off her
back.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We have one encounter for each Exarch:

- Level 25: Thrarak, 1 abyssal rotfiend, and 2 nycademons.

- Level 27: Kazuul, 1 marilith, and 1 balor.

It feels appropriate to add a whole bunch of minions to either encounter, if you
think they're not dangerous enough.

I think I like these two as villains more than I like Dorensain, Orcus'
exarch. Mechanically, Thrarak is just an epic ettin, but she has an interesting
backstory tied to her people's mythological origins. Kazuul's magic weapon
obsession is also interesting, and the Gorgorin lore has a lot of potential as
an adventure hook.

[2]: {{ "/2020/02/26/ettin.html" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2021/06/11/demogorgon.html" | relative_url }}
