---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Death Knight"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - dnd4
---

At last we come to another iconic D&D monster! If you're following VoidDrifter's
RPG.net thread on the Dragon Magazine monster articles, you can read about the
history of Death Knights in the game [here][1]. The article was published before
the Monster Manual came out, so here we finally get to see what 4e Death Knights
look like.

They exist in both the Monster Manual and the Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Death Knights share some similarities with liches, in that they're people who
became undead through a profane ritual so they could live forever. The main
difference here is that they were great warriors instead of potent
spellcasters. The ritual is also a bit different: instead of binding their soul
to a phylactery, it binds it to their favored weapon, which becomes known as
their Soul Weapon.

Death Knights retain the memories and abilities they had in life, but the ritual
distorts their personality into something much nastier than it used to be. Not
that they were all that nice to begin with, of course - becoming a Death Knight
is a choice and the ritual itself is an extremely evil act. Still, it's common
for their to retain a twisted version of whatever code of honor they followed
before. Maybe a Death Knight will wax poetic about how it fell from grace while
it guts you.

You can expect them to always be superlative combatants and have great skill at
leading troops. Even nonsapient skeletons become more dangerous under the
command of a Death Knight.

If you manage to disarm them of their soul weapon, they become dazed and
weakened, though anyone else who holds the weapon suffers the same
effects. Destroying the weapon is useless - the knight can restore it with a
touch. There's no shortcut to destroying a Death Knight: you have to defeat them
in combat. When they fall their soul weapons lose their special properties.

The ritual for turning someone into a death knight comes from Orcus
himself. The agents of Orcus seek out legendary warriors who are reaching the
end of their lives and tempt them with immortality. Others seek the ritual of
their own volition.

## The Numbers

"Death Knight" is actually a _monster template_, the first we've ran into
here. The way 4e templates work is that they make a regular monster Elite and
add a suite of thematic powers. You can technically add two templates together
to make a Solo as well, with a few modifications to the process.

The detailed rules for adding HP and defenses from the template to a monster are
a bit awkward. In practice, you're better off making an Elite or Solo monster
from scratch with the traits from the templates you want. We get two example
Death Knights here, both of which have MM and MV versions.

### Death Knight (Human Fighter)

Called just a "Death Knight" by the Monster Vault, this dapper fellow is a Level
17 Elite Soldier. The MM version has 264 HP, but the MV one has 324. In both
cases it has darkvision, Resist 10 necrotic, and Vulnerable 10 Radiant, and
moves with Speed 5 due to its heavy armor.

Power-wise, there's quite a bit of ground to cover, so we'll list things in the
MV order, by action type.

The Death Knight has a passive trait called Marshal Undead, which gives any
undead allies of level 17 or less within 10 squares of the knight a +2 to all
attacks.

It attacks with its Soulsword, which in the MM does a mix of physical and
necrotic damage plus extra necrotic damage on a hit. In the MV, it does a whole
bunch of necrotic damage and marks the target for a turn even on a miss.

It can also use the sword to perform a Containing Strike, which is like the
basic attack above but allows the knight to make a free attack against the
target if they try to shift until the end of the next turn. The MM version is
single-target, the MV version can target 1 or 2 creatures, making this the
monster's basic Elite multiattack ability.

Oncer per encounter it can use Warrior's Challenge, which I believe is a Fighter
power. It does encounter-power-level damage, pushes the target 2 squares, and
marks every enemy within 2 squares of the target at the end of the push.

Finally, on a recharge 5-6, it can unleash Unholy Flames in a Close Burst 2,
which does a heap of necrotic damage to enemies and gives 2d6 extra fire damage
to the attacks of any undead allies for a turn.

The MM Death Knight also has a Second Wind it can use once per encounter to
recover 66 HP. So that's why tie MM version has less HP!

The Death Knight can punish marked targets like a fighter.

The MV version has one other triggered action: Implacable, which lets it make an
immediate save against being marked, slowed, dazed, immobilized, or
stunned. This means all of those effects have only a 40% chance of actually
landing unless the party can try to apply them multiple times in a turn.

This monster works really well as the commander of an undead unit, and the
suggested encounter features just that: Level 16, a death knight, 2 abyssal
ghouls, and 2 sword wraiths. Perhaps these were the knight's old subordinates,
made into undead servitors as part of the ritual that transformed it.

### Death Knight Blackguard

This MV-only variant is a Level 18 Elite Skirmisher with 338 HP. It mainly shows
the advantage of dropping the somewhat rigid structure of templates and making
your own monsters from scratch using them as guidelines.

It has the same darkvision and resistances as the classic Death Knight above,
and exchanges Marshal Undead with Slayer of the Living, an Aura 3 that slides
any enemy who ends its turn in the aura 3 squares. A handy tool for drawing in
the squishies while keeping the defenders away.

Its basic attack is still the Soulsword, which here allows the knight to shift 2
squares before or after the attack instead of marking. It can use this attack
twice in a turn, against different enemies.

It can also choose to do an at-will Overpowering Attack against 1 or 2 enemies,
which slides _them_ instead of shifting the knight.

The Blackguard possesses an Abyssal Blast encounter power that targets Reflex
and does a heap of fire and necrotic damage to enemies in a Close Burst 5, or
half damage on a miss.

As a minor action, it can use Chilling Glare to make one enemy within 5 squares
automatically grant combat advantage for a turn.

And finally, the Blackguard is just as Implacable as the MV Death Knight.

Yeah, keeping any sort of formation while one of these is on the field is a
hopeless endeavor. It becomes even more dangerous when paired with a classic
death knight and a few other lesser undead, preferably ones that do nasty things
if they get combat advantage, which it can give out freely.

### Death Knight (Dragonborn Paladin)

This MM-only variant is a Level 25 Elite Soldier with 373 HP (466 if you add the
Second Wind). It has darkvision, Resist 15 necrotic, and Vulnerable 15 radiant.

This Death Knight combines many of the powers of the classic model (which come
from the template) with a few paladin-like attacks. This means it has the same
Marhsal Undead aura and Unholy Flames burst. Being an MM-only monster it lacks
Implacable.

Aside from the basic soulsword attack, it can use the Valiant Strike at-will
power that gives it an extra +1 to the attack roll per adjacent enemy. It also
has a Terrifying Smite encounter power that does extra damage, pushes the target
5 squares and prevents it from moving closer to the knight for a turn.

Its mark power is the paladin's Divine Challenge, which lasts until the knight
marks someone else and does a bit of automatic necrotic damage to targets that
flout the mark.

This death knight features in the second suggested encounter of the Monster
Manual entry, which is level 24 and has it accompanied by a fell wyvern, a great
flameskull and a bunch of abyssal ghoul minions. It's something you can expect
when raiding Orcus's neighborhood in the Abyss.

I can see why they fixed the paladin's mark in Divine Power, and why they
dropped much of the fiddly bits for adding templates. Not having any multiattack
ability makes it a little less effective than an elite monster of its level
should be. The lack of Implacable is also keenly felt. This is a bit
disappointing since we're probably looking at someone who had a direct hand in
the fall of Arkhosia.


[1]: https://forum.rpg.net/index.php?threads/lets-read-4e-dragon-dungeon-magazine-monster-articles.840167/post-22345155
