---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Mimic"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Mimics have been in the game since its beginning, and are are one of D&D's most
iconic monsters. They're also notable for originating within D&D and "breaking
out" to become a popular monster in other games and media.

## The Lore

The image of a trasure chest growing teeth and eating the hapless adventurer
trying to open it is a popular classic even within D&D's own implied
setting. Everyone knows it, and most think it's a pretty funny joke. Everyone
but those who have actually gone through this and survived the experience.

Mimics are highly intelligent creatures originating from the Far Realm. Despite
their intelligence they don't seem to be interested in friendly relations with
other sapients, and are mostly interested in using their smarts to fool and eat
them.

Fourth edition mimics also take over the "murderous alien shapeshifter" role
from doppelgangers, which as we saw before are now mostly just people. You see,
the classic chest mimic is actually a juvenile indivitual. As it matures, it
gains the ability to absorb the memories of the people they devour and to take
their shapes. These impersonator mimics infiltrate mortal society, moving around
and taking different shapes as they feed. They reproduce by budding. Their spawn
spend a time joined to the mass of their parent before setting out on their own
as object mimics. In an emergency, the parent can reabsorb them for a quick
burst of energy.

Mimics rarely seek out alliances, but they often enter a symbiotic relationship
with inedible monsters like constructs or incorporeal undead. The mimic will
lure victims to the other monster's lair, and help with the fight so it can eat
the bodies later.

## The Numbers

Mimics are Medium Aberrant Magical Beasts. They have Resist Acid 5/tier,
Darkvision, and Tremorsense 5. Their signature ability, of course, is
**Shapeshift**.

The ability allows a mimic to switch between Ooze and Object forms. In Ooze
form, it gains the standard Ooze ability to ignore all penalties for squeezing
through small spaces. In object form, it can't attack but gains Resist 10 to all
damage and others must succeed at a Perception check to notice it's a mimic. The
DC varies with the individual.

### Object Mimic

As mentioned above, this is a junevile of the species and the one PCs are most
likely to meet first. It's a Level 8 Lurker with 71 HP, Speed 5, and all
standard traits listed above.

These mimics have an **Ambush** trait that gives them 2d6 bonus damage on all
attacks against surprised victims. The creature has two attacks beyond its basic
**Slam**.  **Crushing Tendrils** do light physical damage, grab the target (with
a -5 penalty to escape) and inflict ongoing 15 acid damage while the grab
lasts. **Ravening Maw** (recharge 5+) does heavy physical damage and slows (save
ends).

Either of these special attacks would make a good opener against a surprised
victim, benefitting from combat advantage and from bonus Ambush damage. The
Perception DC to pierce the mimic's disguise is 24. They usually take forms that
are enticing to their potential prey - a treasure chest is a classic for luring
adventurers, but any other Medium object will do. Berry bushes, fancy statues,
comfy chairs...

### Impersonator Mimic

This is an older specimen that specializes in impersonating its victims and
infiltrating mortal society. Unlike the monstrous doppelganger of editions past,
impersonator mimics are more interested in _food_ than in political power. Their
main goal at any given time alternates between staying hidden and luring their
next victim to an isolated spot. They can use psychic powers to help with those
goals, in addition to their shapeshifting and mundane deception.

Impersonator Mimics are Level 16 Controllers with 160 HP. The impersonator's
**Shapeshift** ability allows them to take humanoid form in addition to the two
standard ones. This form gives them a +4 bonus to Bluff and allows them to use
all languages known by the last person they killed. The DC to pierce any of the
impersonator's disguises is 31.

Its attacks are the usual **Slam**, and a pair of psychic powers. **Forcible
Conversion** (recharge 5+) is a non-damaging melee power that attacks Will
dominates its target (save ends). **Call to Harvest** (minor action) is a
non-damaging ranged power that also attacks Will. On a hit, it slides the target
4 squares and makes it grant combat advantage for a turn. Finally, as a free
action, they can **Absorb** a mimic spawn that's adjacent to them or occupying
their space. This kills the spawn and gives them 1 Action Point. This does make
it one of the few non-elite monsters with access to action points.

Note that only the object form forbids the mimic from attacking - they can use
all of these abilities in humanoid form without having to shapeshift, and they
can Absorb in any form.

### Mimic Spawn

A very young mimic that hasn't left the "care" of its parent yet. It can already
shapeshift into objects, and it can also meld into its parent's form for
protection and increased stealth. This does make it susceptible to being
re-absorbed.

Spawn are Level 16 Minion Lurkers, which make them suitable for hanging out with
impersonator mimics. Not every impersonator will have spawn, but those who do
will be a bit more dangerous.

The **One With Master** trait represents the spawn's ability to merge with its
parent. A merged spawn occupies the same space as the parent, cannot attack, and
cannot be targeted or take damage. Up to four spawn can meld to a single
impersonator. Their only attack is a **Slam** that does average damage for a
minion of this level. The DC to pierce their object disguise is 31.

## Final Impressions

You just gotta have mimics available in a D&D game. I don't think I've ever used
one, but I feel good just knowing that they exist. I guess it took the authors
a long time to come up with cool mechanics for their shapeshifting, which is why
it took a while for them to asppear appear in 4e.

The level mechanics make it seem that mimics start their lives pretty good at
shapeshifting and get worse at it for a while before reaching their former level
of skill, but that's just a mechanical artifact. Levels can be adjusted freely -
you could easily have lower-level spawn and higher level object mimics.
