---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Phantom Brigade"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

A new group, and a surprise lesson on Nerath's history!

## The Lore

So far we've only got the bare minimum of information on the history and
geography of Nerath as a whole. We mostly know that the Vale was part of its
northern frontier and that it fell about a century ago. This entry gives lots of
new information because while the history of the Phantom Brigade is intimately
tied to that of the empire of Nerath.

The Empire of Nerath was founded in the distant south around six hundred years
ago, with the establishment its capital city of Nera. It quickly spread in all
directions and became a world power. Its long history starts with an early
period of rapid expansion, goes through the troubled and despotic rule of
Emperor Magroth, and then through a long period of hegemonic peace and
stability. This peace lasted until the empire's abrupt fall about 100 years ago.

No one knows exactly how the fall of Nerath happened (or, if they do, they're
keeping it a secret). What is known is that a combination of traumatic events
that might have included both monster attacks and natural disasters left the
entire imperial family unaccounted for. The vast Nerathi armies were left
leaderless and without direction, all the simmering conflicts between other
noble families blew up with no one to keep them in line, and soon the complex
infrastructure that united all regions of the empire stopped being maintained
and crumbled, turning its cities and provinces into a scattered points of
light.

Nerath had several knightly orders at the time of its fall, and none where more
prestigious than the Knights of the Empire. Imperial Knights were paladins and
rangers selected for their skill, loyalty, and nobility of character. They
answered directly to the Emperor, acting as his personal bodyguards and
extensions of his will. When everything went to ruin, they were one of the few
groups who remained committed to defending the empire and keeping it
whole. Nearly all of them died in the decade between the initial catastrophe and
when everyone finally acknowledged Nerath was no more.

This did not stop them, however. The oaths that bound them to the order were
more than just pretty words. They included a mysterious magical effect or curse
that eventually made the dead Knights return as ghosts. This started happening
decades after the fall. Though the Knighs know their empire has fallen, they are
still compelled to seek the honor they could not gain in life, and fulfill their
oaths as best they can. They are now known as the Phantom Brigade.

The first recorded appearance of the ghost knights was right here on the Vale,
when three of them were spotted racing through the Gardbury Downs. In our
narrative present they be seen anywhere the hand of Nera used to reach.

Knights look much as they did in life, though ghostly and translucent. They can
be identified by their distinctive archaic armor and by the way the moonlight
shines through them. Their weapons are bound to their souls, and are where those
souls reside. All of them bear the emblem of the Threefold Crown of Nerath,
marking their bearers as Knights of the Empire.

If knights wear the same armor they did in life, you have a very important
decision to make. Is the Nazgul-looking fellow in the illustration a typical
Knight, or is he Sir Georg Edgelord, who is an outlier and should not be
counted? Your answer will say very interesting things about Nerath either way.

Though we saw in previous entries that Nerath did some pretty horrible shit in
the past, the Knights seem genuinely concerned about upholding its highest
ideals and their original oaths, even though they're ghosts. They will not
attack random travelers unprovoked and will probably be enthusiastic allies
in the fight against threats to the Vale if they can be convinced of the need
for this alliance.

However, they can still come into conflict with the PCs if they try to trespass
upon the areas the Knights still protect (which are full of juicy
treasure-filled ruins). In these cases a fight might be avoided if the PCs can
present the Knights with a genuine writ of passage or Nerathi signet ring.

## The Numbers

Phantom Brigade members are Medium Shadow Humanoids with the Undead tag. Most of
them are former humans. They have Darkvision and immunity to disease and poison,
but lack the usual resistances and vulnerabilities. They have ground speeds of
6.

As ghosts, our knights have both Insubstantial and Phasing. Only force damage
will deal full damage to them, and since they don't have additional
vulnerabilities the trait can't be temporarily shut down. They do tend to have
less HP than a typical monster of their level, which somewhat compensates for
it.

Their unique signature trait is **Unrelenting Brigade**. Whenever an ally who
also has this trait drops to 0 HP within 5 squares of the knight, they gain a +2
to-hit bonus until the end of their next turn.

Every single stat block in this entry has Lawful Good as its Alignment, a rarity
in monster and NPC stat blocks.

Level-wise, the Phantom Brigade can be a threat from the mid-Heroic to the mid
Paragon-tier, putting them on the same bracket as, say, the Gray Company.

### Phantom Brigade Squire

Squires are Level 6 Minion Soldiers. They can attack with their **Soulbound
Short Swords** and their **Spectral Crossbows**, both of which deal psychic
damage. If an enemy hits an ally adjacent to the squire with a melee attack,
they can use **Shielding Martyr** to become the target of that attack instead.

### Phantom Brigade Armiger

Armigers are Level 7 Brutes with 71 HP. They fight with **Soulbound Bardiches**
that deal psychic damage, and their charges use the **Charging Rebuke** special
attack that deals the same amount of damage, push the target 1 square, and knock
it prone. They can also make **Furious Sweeps** to attack everyone in a Close
Blast 2 for slightly less damage.

### Phantom Brigade Justiciar

These Level 7 Skirmishers have 54 HP and project an aura (1) of **Blind
Justice** that inflicts a -2 to-hit penalty on enemies caught inside. They fight
with **Soulbound Hammers** that can be used in melee or thrown, and they can
**Evade and Strike** at will. This ends any marks on them, lets them shift 4
squares, and then make a basic melee attack.

### Phantom Brigade Banneret

Bannerets are likely minor officers, since their name means "one who carries a
banner". They're Level 8 Soldiers with the Leader tag and 60 HP. Their phantom
banner projects a **Gift of Grace** aura (3) that grants a +5 bonus to saves to
allies inside.

The banneret fights with a **Soulbound Tulwar**, which does psychic and radiant
damage. As an effect, it also marks and slows the target for a turn. If a marked
enemy within 5 squares tries to make an attack that doesn't target the banneret,
they can use **Stalwart Restraint** as a reaction. This always hits! It
immobilizes the target and inflicts 10 ongoing psychic damage on them (save ends

Bannerets are quite danregous. Their attacks always do something and they're a
lot more dangerous to ignore than your typical soldier monster.

### Phantom Brigade Templar

These imposing undead paladins bring the Brigade into the paragon tier. They're
Level 12 Controllers with 85 HP. They fight with **Soulbound Morningstars** that
deal psychic damage and slide 2 squares on a hit. They can attack at range with
**Righteous Strikes** that deal cold and radiant damage, and also slow on a hit
(save ends). And they can use their **Frightful Majesty** to attack enemies in
a Close Burst 1 and daze them for a turn on a hit. This recharges when they're
first bloodied.

### Phantom Brigade Knight-Commander

Knight-Commanders are high-ranking officers, likely responsible for leading all
Imperial Knights in a given region. They're Level 14 Soldiers with the Leader
tag and 96 HP.

Their weapon of choice is a **Keening Soulbound Backsword**, which deals psychic
and thunder damage and which marks the target for a turn as an effect. The sword
can be used in a **Soul Strike** maneuver (recharge 5+) that deals more damage
and gives the knight-commander 10 temporary HP. The commander can also attack
enemies in a Close Burst 1 by repeating the **Oath of Nerath**, which targets
Fortitude and deals psychic damage.

If an enemy within 2 squares that's marked by the commander chooses to ignore
the mark, the commander can use **Call to Arms** to allow an ally within 5
squares to shift 3 spaces and make a free basic attack against the triggering
enemy.

If my assumption back in the first paragraph is correct, there's a
Knight-Commander in the Vale. The book doesn't give any information about that
individual, so you're free to come up with their backstory and description
yourself.

## Final Impressions

Turns out undead in 4e don't _have_ to be evil! The magic binding these knights
to the world could still be quite bad, but it has not affected their souls or
personalities. Still, as mentioned, they might end up fighting PCs who insist on
exploring former Nerathi sites the knights consider to be under their
protection.

I'm very interested in what might happen if the Gray Company or one of their
Nerathi revivalist rivals runs into the Phantom Brigade. I imagine that anyone
who meets with the knights' approval will have the legitimacy of their claims
greatly bolstered... but I also imagine that Halvath Cormarrin would _not_ have
their approval. On the other hand, the Knight-Commander's sword is likely the
weapon Cormarrin is after, because that's an easy and fun connection to make.

Things will turn out very differently it Cormarrin does in fact have a way to
compel the Phantom Brigade to be loyal to him. This could be the thing that
catapults the Gray Company into a paragon-tier threat. In that case, making the
Knights turn against him would be a key step in defeating their imperialist
aims.
