---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Minor Factions, Part 2"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

Continuing our exploration of the minor factions at play here, we'll now look at
those whose presence or attention are centered on the Neverwinter Wood.

## Gray Wolf Uthgardt

The Gray Wolves were just another typical Uthgardt tribe of no particular
distinction until a few hundred years ago, when they took in human refugees from
Gauntlgrym who had been fleeing their captivity by the mind flayers who lived
there. Some of those had been afflicted by lycanthropy. Time and primal magic
made this condition the tribe's main power and badge of honor.

In the context of the Neverwinter campaign, this is kinda bad for the PCs
because the Gray Wolves have been captivated by the Shadovar's honeyed words and
recruited as their agents and shock troops. They expect to be citizens of their
new world-spanning empire, and to be given dominion over all of the North's
wilderness in exchange for their service.

Fortunately, not all members of the tribe fell for this. Those that didn't were
cast out and banded together into a group known as the Forsworn, who work to
oppose the works of the Netherese. The Forsworn avoid fighting their own kin,
but the Grey Wolves do not return the favor and try to kill them on sight.

The book recommends using existing werewolf and shifter stat blocks when
building encounters against Grey Wolves, and gives us stats for a Werewolf
Stormcaller (level 6 Artillery) that fulfills a niche not usually covered by
those blocks. It also has stats for Ethraniev Marrowslake, a particularly
bloodthirsty Gray Wolf pack leader (level 7 brute). Both work as you'd expect
for werewolves, with the ability to change shape and both weapon and infectious
bite attacks. The stormcaller has ranged spells that do lightning or thunder
damage.

The Pack Outcast PC was among the first of the Gray Wolves to be exiled, since
they didn't agree to join the Shadovar right at the start. The Forsworn were
exiled after that, as the tribe's tactics became more and more violent. As the
campaign start, dissidents are being executed instead of exiled. The Outcast has
an easy in with the Forsworn as written, because the group will likely recognize
the PC as being right all along.

The book says the GM is free to make the Forsworn still be evil if they don't
want the PCs allying with them, though I probably wouldn't do that. It leans too
much on the "savage barbarian" trope.

PCs who become friends of the Forsworn might be granted an utility power named
**Primal Surge** as a blessing or reward. It's an encounter power that triggers
when you use one of your other encounter powers. It lets you roll a d20, and on
a result of 10 or higher the other power is not expended.

## Iliyanbruen Fey

This is the group the Iliyanbruen Guardian PC belongs to, and we saw a lot about
them already. Here's a recap:

As we saw earlier, they're descendants of eladrin who fled to the Feywild to
survive the destruction caused on their kingdom by the fall of Xinlenal. When
the barriers between worlds started thinning, they sent expeditions back to the
place where they crossed, and found it occupied by evil fey. They drove those
out, and build an outpost named New Shandarar on both sides of the portal. Then
they explored their old ruins in the middle world and discovered that they had
been ravaged by more than time and disuse - many of their sacred relics and
cultural treasures had been plundered.

The expeditionary force made it their mission to recover what was stolen. All of
them are pretty angry about this: the main difference is some of them are angry
just at the people responsible for the looting, while others are angry at All
The Mortals and want to genocide/conquer the region on principle.

Whether moderate or extremist, the fey of Iliyanbruen are likely to respond with
violence to anyone trespassing on their territory now, unless the Guardian PC is
with them.

The expedition's commander, Merrisara Winterwhite, is a moderate and the main
reason they haven't started attacking the region. Several of the community
leaders under her, however, are extremists, and spend all of their time
agitating for more bloodshed. One in particular, a dude named Addemios
Three-Dawn, is a secret worshiper of Asmodeus and in league with the evil fey
the expedition drove away from the portal. He's the assistant to one of the
city's priests of Corellon, and his influence is responsible for a lot of the
recent upswing in violent sentiment among the eladrin.

The encounter table for New Shandarar is made up of heroic-tier fey creatures:
elves, eladrin, dryads, unicorns, treants and lots of trained fey
beasts. Addemios is statted up as Level 5 Artillery with ranged and area
spells. He's far from the most powerful individual in this faction, so I'm
guessing that getting them to back off would involve more than defeating
him. That'd still be an important step, though.

Should the extremists win out, the fey could move to "major faction" status
relatively quickly, as they are a significant military force with some pretty
powerful creatures. They certainly _believe_ they have what it takes to conquer
the region and kill everyone they dislike, but they are probably unaware of the
true extent of the Thayan, Netherese, and Aberrant presences here.

## Cult of the Dragon

Unlike the Ashmadai, these cultists have a lot of trouble passing as typical
citizens. The local cell was busy with the usual Cult of the Dragon activities,
which are sucking up to evil dragons and trying to convince them to become
dracoliches. This changed when Valindra (the lich leading the Thayans) took
their leader's Ring of the Dragon.

Now they work for her as muscle and are also tasked with finding a way to raise
the dead Lorragauth as a dracolich. Their leader, Adimund Kroskas, is working on
that as slowly as possible while he tries to figure out a way to recover his
ring. He hasn't made much progress in that either and desperately needs
something to change in his situation. He'll probably try to make a move when a
significant setback occurs in Valindra's plan - likely one caused by the PCs.

Their encounter table includes humans, genasi, dragonborn, and other "typically
playable" stat blocks.
