---
layout: post
title: "Where I read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Bat"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - wir
---

Bats are tinier nocturnal mammals who feed on fruit and insects... but those
aren't the bats we're talking about here. These bats are proper monsters.

## The Lore

We get two different bat species here. Both are Medium, meaning they're the size
of an adult human and have enough wingspan to get that bulk airborne.

Fire bats are Elemental Beasts (fire), which are native to the Elemental Chaos
but spread to the world through natural passages between the two planes and took
root here. In much the same way cats migrated to Australia on ships and became a
danger to the ecosystem, I guess.

Shadowunter bats are apparently native to the world. They're descended from
normal bats who happened to live in places where necromantic energies from the
Shadowfell leaked through, and those energies mutated them.

Both types of monstrous bat have Int 2 and are Unaligned. They take well to
domestication, and so might be found as pets and guard animals for people or
intelligent monsters, particularly those that share origins with them. In fact,
the Fire Bat lore entry specifically mentions azer, which gives credence to my
theory that the azer used to be Heroic-tier opponents who got upgraded to
Paragon at the last minute.


## The Numbers

Organizing monsters alphabetically by name means Bats are actually the first
real Heroic-tier creatures we've run across in the book. Angels had an
Heroic-tier variant but it was kind of a footnote among a bunch of more powerful
individuals.

**Shadowunter Bats** are Level 3 Lurkers that have 38 HP and fight as
skirmishers. They're quite clumsy on the ground, but fly with speed 8. It
appears they attack with a wickedly barbed tail, which has a bonus to attack and
does extra damage in dim light or darkness. They can use it in a Flyby Attack,
moving their speed and making a tail attack at any point (and not provoking
opportunity attacks when moving away).

Hm... if one or more of these attack the party, I'd expect them to do so in an
area that's entirely shrouded in dim light or darkness. You'd think that this
would allow them to get the bonus damage all the time, but PCs are likely to be
carrying their own bright light sources in these places. So they're going after
the rogue who's scouting ahead without a light source. If domesticated, their
owners should probably employ some trick to neutralize the party's lights.

**Fire Bats** are Level 3 Skirmishers with 60 HP and 10 fire resistance. They
fly as fast as shadowunters, and are as clumsy on the ground. Being bats that
are on fire, their attack is a touch that does fire damage and ongoing fire
damage. Their version of the flyby attack allows them to shift 4 squares and
make an attack against anyone they touch on the way.

The sample encounter is level 3, a party of goblins and their two shadowhunter
bat pets.


## Final Impressions

Functional opposition for when your party ventures into bat country. I think the
fire bats work a little better, since the shadowunter's bonus damage is too
fiddly. Changing it so that they only need to _start_ their turn in dim light or
darkness to get the bonus would make them work better.

Since they're only level 3 regulars, the math bug doesn't affect them all that
much.
