---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Gargoyle"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Gargoyles are based on sculptures found in many medieval buildings (particularly
churches). If I recall correctly, these statues depict horrible beasts and are
said to act as a sort of spiritual scarecrow, frightening demons away. They're
usually known as _grotesques_, with _gargoyle_ being a specific type of
grotesque that has a waterspout running through it to channel rainwater. It's
"gargling", you see.

D&D gargoyles are a classic monster, part of the game since its beginnings. So
classic, in fact, that the real surprise here is when the demonic-looking
statues _aren't_ gargoyles in disguise. They appear in both books.

## The Lore

Despite appearances, gargoyles aren't animated statues, but living semi-organic
creatures who originated in the Elemental Chaos and spread to the world long
ago. As you'd expect, they're ambush predators, and they're also both sapient
and inclined to cruelty and sadism. They're fond of "playing" with their prey
before eating it and don't care if it's sapient itself.

Nevertheless, they can form cooperative relationships with other earth
creatures, and are sometimes employed by evil summoners or demon cultitsts who
bind them with magic. Gargoyles aren't demons, but they look demonic enough and
are easier to bind!

The Monster Vault makes an interesting inversion by saying that in the world of
D&D, the gargoyle's reputation for cruelty has turned its image into a sign of
warning to intruders. This means that people in the setting have a reason to
sculpt gargoyles into their buildings! The monsters of course end up
gravitating to these places since they provide such convenient camouflage.

## The Numbers

As creatures of earth, gargoyles have Tremorsense 10 and an immunity to
petrification. They're not immune to poison because they're still
semi-organic. Gargoyles move pretty fast, with a ground speed of 6 and a flight
speed of 8. No hover capability, but they also can attack from the air with no
penalties. Gargoyles also have darkvision.

They're all Medium Elemental Humanoids (Earth).

### Gargoyle (Both)

The classic model is a Level 9 Lurker with 77 HP. It attacks with a claw that
suffers from the damage bug, and can use it as part of a Flyby Attack that
allows it to fly its speed without drawing opportunity attacks and make a claw
attack at any point in the movement. A hit here also knocks the target prone.

As expected the gargoyle can also assume a Stone Form, which gives it Resist 25
to all damage and Regeneration 3. In this form, it can only perceive its
surroundings via tremorsense, and can take no other actions other than to revert
to normal. Reverting is a minor action, meaning it can attack on the same turn
it does so.

The creature doesn't do any additional damage from attacking from hiding,
meaning it's another one of those MM lurkers who should have been a skirmisher.

The MV version is a proper lurker: though its basic attack does the same damage,
it now has a +20 bonus on its next damage roll after leaving Stone Form. It also
only has Tremorsense while in Stone Form, and its Flyby Attack ability (renamed
to Swoop Attack) only allows an attack at the end of the movement.

Instead of regenerating, the MV gargoyle gains 5 temporary HP at the start of
its turn. I don't think this stacks, so it will never get rid of all its damage
during the fight. This is in line with late 4e's policy of never giving its
monsters much in the way of healing abilities.

### Gargoyle Rake (MV)

This is a Level 5 Lurker with 52 HP that is essentially identical to its level 9
cousin, above. Its level-based stats are smaller, of course. Also, damage
resistance while in stone form is only 20, and the damage bonus is +15.

### Gargoyle Rock Hurler (MV)

This one throws rocks! It's Level 11 Artillery with 87 HP. The basic claw attack
is okay, and it can hurl rocks either one at a time (Ranged 20 vs. AC) or in a
volley (Area Bust 1 Within 10 vs. AC; half damage on a miss).

The rock hurler can't create its own ammunition, but it's likely to be found in
a place with plenty of loose stone lying around anyway.

It can't turn into a statue completely, but its stony hide gives it Resist 10 to
damage from ranged attacks originating from more than 5 squares away.

### Nabassu Gargoyle (Both)

While still not classed as a demon, this Level 18 Lurker is a lot closer to
being one than its weaker cousins. It has 131 HP and all standard gargoyle
traits.

Its abilities are a basic claw, a non-basic bite that does a bit more damage,
and a stronger version of Stone Form. Instead of getting a bonus to its next
damage roll when leaving Stone Form, the nabassu gargoyle automatically does a
chunk of fire and necrotic damage to every enemy within 3 squares of it.

While in stone form it also emits a Bloodfire curse (aura 3) that deals 10 fire
and necrotic damage to any enemy that ends its turn in range. When this happens,
the monster gains 10 temporary HP.

A useful note: "10 fire and necrotic damage" means 10 damage of the "fire and
necrotic" type, not "10 fire and 10 necrotic". This means you resist it with the
lower of your fire and necrotic resistance - if you have Resist 15 to fire but 0
to necrotic, you take the full 10 damage.

The Monster Manual version is a bit clunkier. Its Stone Form functions exactly
like that of the MM classic model, and its bite heals it for half its rolled
damage on a hit. Bloodfire is an Aura 2 that does 5 damage and weakens enemies
who already are taking ongoing damage, and only works _out_ of Stone Form.

Just use the MV version, it's better.

## Sample Encounter and Final Impressions

The sample encounter from the MM is level 9: 3 gargoyles, 2 galeb duhr
earthbreakers, and 1 gibbering mouther. It's essentially another version of the
similar galeb duhr/gargoyle/bullete encounter we already saw, with a different
interloper.

The Monster Vault gargoyles are generally superior to the MM ones when it comes
to mechanics, and you lose nothing by ignoring the Monster Manual on this
one. Lore-wise, I feel gargoyles are one of those monsters so classic that you
almost _have_ to feature them in your campaign at some point. The big subversion
here would be a campaign where every statue was exactly what it seemed.
