---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Gremlin"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Just look at this pointy boy. They're not even trying to hide the inspiration
for him.

Anyway, D&D has had monsters named "gremlin" since almost its beginning, but the
lore for them its new to this edition.

## The Lore

A long time ago, the fomorians under King Thrumbolg took a large group of goblin
captives, transformed them into bioweapons, and released them into the cities of
their eladrin enemies. The new creatures had a great aptitude for deception and
sabotage, and an engineered predilection for it. These were the first gremlins.

They did their job wonderfully, disrupting the alliance of eladrin city states
arrayed against Thrumbolg by altering the correspondence between them, murdering
key officials, and other such deeds. However, they also ended up doing the same
sort of thing to Thumbolg's own court, causing great damage to it. Gremlins
gotta gremlin.

The little rascals were cast out, and over the ages spread through the Feywild
and the middle world. Though they sometimes live openly in the communities of
other sapients, many gremlins follow their engineered calling and hide out among
their chosen victims, taming vermin to do their bidding and engaging in the same
ghastly shenanigans their ancestors did back in the day, basically for the
lulz. The worst among them find natural allies in demons, who have the same
appetite for chaos.

Examples of things gremlins do, taken from the stat block descriptions: stealing
documents and heirlooms from a royal court and stashing them to be found in the
quarters of visiting nobles; intercepting and altering important correspondence
so that a call for peace becomes a declaration of war; and plain old serial
murder.

## The Numbers

Gremlins are Small Fey Humanoids with low-light vision and a speed of 6. They
have two signature abilities present in almost all stat blocks. The first is
**Sabotaging Presence**, an large aura (size 5) that gives enemies inside a -5
penalty to skill checks. The second is **Gremlin Tactics**, a reaction that
allows them to swap spaces with an enemy that misses them with a melee attack.

Skill-wise, training in Stealth and Thievery is nearly universal, and they
occasionally know other "thiefy" skills like Bluff as well.

### Gremlin Deceiver

Deceivers are Level 5 Controllers with 63 HP, which makes them the earliest
gremlin the PCs are likely to find. Like other gremlins, their presence is going
to be hidden at first, and they only fight when found out.

Deceivers fight with their **claws**, but their magic is a lot more
interesting. They can cast a fireball-sized **Befuddling Burst** that targets
Will and, on a hit, deals psychic damage and prevents targets from shifting or
standing up (save ends). The burst itself doesn't knock them prone - that's what
the **Slip Up** minor-action attack does. This is a ranged attack that targets
Will and does no damage.

For added lulz, pair them with other monsters that can knock people prone, such
as other gremlins, or wolves reskinned as dire rats.

### Gremlin Skulker

Skulkers are Level 7 Lurkers with 64 HP, and they're surprisingly sticky. Aside
from the standard gremlin traits, they have a **Shadow Sneak** passive that
makes them invisible while adjacent to an enemy, and **Opportunistic Advantage**
that gives them extra damage in opportunity attacks.

Their **claw** attacks do okay damage and "curse" the target: if the target
moves away from the gremlin, they fall prone at the end of their movement. And
when an enemy adjacent to the skulker moves, the **Shadow Skulk** encounter
power allows them to shift up to 6 squares _simultaneously_, following the enemy
as it moves so it stays adjacent.

You want this one right in the middle of the PCs, preferrably starting the fight
already there with some of those strong opportunity attcks after sneaking in
undetected.

### Gremlin Conniver

Connivers are Level 17 Controllers with 162 HP. That's quite a jump in power!
They're probably similar to the OG gremlins that destroyed the eladrin alliance.

Their basic **claw** attack also teleports the target 5 squares on a hit. Their
**Connive** spell is a non-damaging, at-will ranged attack that dominates on a
hit (_save ends_!). Fortunately only one creature can be dominated at a time.

As a minor action it can also create a **Beguiling Fog** (recharge 6+), a
fireball-sized area attack against Will that does no damage. It always dazes the
enemy - a hit means it's a (save ends) effect, a miss means it only lasts a
turn.

While connivers have little direct damage potential, they can dole out some of
the game's most annoying status effects at-will. The teleport effect on their
basic claw attack is also particularly wonderful in battlefields with dangerous
terrain or other hazards.

### Gremlin Prankster

Pranksters are Level 17 Minion Controllers, perfect for when you want to
re-enact a certain 80s movie. They're not particularly hardy, but they like to
run around in huge crowds and try to cause as much chaos as possible before
vanishing. They have a basic **claw** attack and a **Slip Up** ranged attack
that's similar to the Deceiver's, but also slides the target 3 squares before
knocking them prone.

## Final Impressions

The teme for the Gremlins 2 movie was playing through my head the entire time I
was writing this. I love these critters.

They're also very interesting mechanically and can end up making your PCs pull
their own hair out in frustration. That can lead to memorable sessions if you do
it properly, but can also be frustrating for the _players_, so consider the
examples below cautiously.

If you really want the PCs to have a bad time, make sure your gremlin encounter
takes place in a site full of traps and other hazards that require skill checks
to disable. Or even have the PCs deal with a gremlin battle and a skill
challenge at the same time. The skill penalty from Sabotaging Presence is
_untyped_, meaning it technically stacks, but if you're feeling merciful you can
say it caps out at the -5 a single gremlin would provide.

That skill penalty also aids grappling-centered monsters! The roll to escape a
grapple is a skill check, after all.

Since a lot of gremlins can knock PCs prone, they also go really well with
monsters that can do ugly things to prone PCs. Especially evil GMs might want to
keep in mind that 2 Gremlin Deceivers and 2 Needlefang Drake Swarms make up a
valid Level 3 encounter.
