---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Fey Lingerer"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I think it's fair to say that eladrins can be overachievers. Their societies
produce a lot of gallant knights and powerful spellcasters, who go on to
accumulate glory and renown to their name. They'll be the first to say the world
is a better place due to their efforts.

Sometimes, though, things go wrong. A knight perishes with a quest unfulfilled,
or a mage dies just before making that one crucial breakthrough that would get
him tenure at LÃ³rien Polytechnic. Whether from violence, accident or natural
causes, such deaths are incredibly frustrating for the eladrin in question, so
they simply refuse to go. The entity that results from this is known as a Fey
Lingerer.

Fey lingerers resemble the people they were in life, but the book describes then
as "withdrawn from elven grace". In other words, they look clearly dead, their
formerly shiny countenances now decomposed or dessicated. They're also quite
cruel and anti-social, their personalities now dominated by the frustration and
anger that kept them from passing on.

Lingerers generally try to accomplish whatever it is they were trying to do when
they died, and can linger on even after that, looking for ways to gain the glory
and fame they feel were due to them while they lived. They might employ other
undead in this, and sometimes they also gather living eladrin followers who are
willing to help their fallen heroes.

When a fey lingerer is destroyed in combat, its spirit emerges angrier than
ever. This _vestige_ knows it can never complete its objectives now that its
body has been destroyed, and becomes obsessed with taking revenge on those
responsible.

## The Numbers

Fey lingerers are corporeal undead, and since they used to be overachieving
eladrin luminaries, they're usually mid-to-late Paragon-tier. As is standard for
undead, they have Darkvision plus some level of Necrotic resistance and Radiant
Vulnerability.

Lingerers retain the eladrin Fey Step power, and add an aura of **Spiraling
Despair** (radius 3) which inflicts a -2 penalty to attacks and saves to enemies
caught inside. They also have an extra bonus on saves against charm effects.

They're Elite monsters, but this is implemented in a novel and very interesting
way. Normally an Elite would have double HP, but Fey Lingerers have the normal
amount. However, when they hit 0 HP they become Vestiges, incorporeal undead
with their own stat blocks. They start in the same position as the original
lingerer, and act on the same initiative order, but are otherwise treated as if
they had just entered the fight: full HP, all abilities unused.

Vestiges aren't worth any additional XP when fought as part of a lingerer fight
since the lingerer's XP total accounts for them. You can design encounters
with vestiges directly, though, and in that case they're worth XP as normal for
a regular monster of their level.

### Lingerer Knight

These knights usually died when trying to fulfill an important mission or quest,
and are driven to complete it. They might have been honorable sorts before their
deaths, but now they're just desperate. Bearing the same weapons they did in
life, they can infuse their strikes with necrotic energy and force enemies to
experience their rather unhealthy mental state.

Lingerer Knights are Level 16 Elite Soldiers with 152 HP. They have all standard
lingerer traits and a speed of 6. Their necrotic resistance is 10, and their
radiant vulnerability 5. The one in the book fights with a **Longsword** that
also inflicts ongoing necrotic damage (save ends). **Double Attack** allows it
to perform two sword attacks in a single action.

They can also perform a spell called **Spirit Sword Circle** (recharge 5+), a
Close Burst 1 vs. Reflex that does slightly less damage than a double attack and
also inflicts ongoing necrotic damage (save ends).

That unhealthy mental state manifests as two different powers: **Desperate
Challenge** (Ranged 10; Encounter) allows the knight to mark a target until the
end of the fight or until the knight discorporates, whichever comes
first. Marked targets take some automatic necrotic damage when they make an
attack that doesn't target the knight. **Spiritual Despondence** triggers when
the knight is first bloodied and deals automatic necrotic damage in a Close
Burst 3.

### Fey-Knight Vestige

A destroyed lingerer knight becomes one of these. It's a Level 16 Lurker with 75
HP. It has all standard lingerer traits, a ground speed of 6, and a fly speed
of 6. Its resistances and vulnerabilities increase by 5 each, and it's also
insubstantial.

The vestige fights with a **Ghostsword** that targets Fortitude instead of AC,
does necrotic damage, and makes the target grant combat advantage to the vestige
(save ends). This means it can do its "Lurker thing" while staying in the front
lines, which is a bit unusual but matches the "knight" flavor. **Desperate
Dash** (move; recharge 5+) allows it to shift 6 squares and possibly escape
being surrounded.

### Lingerer Fell Incanter

Fell Incanters hang around for more open-ended reasons than knights, and are
usually obsessed with obtaining more arcane knowledge and power in order to Show
Them All. Their magic is tinted with their hatred, so all of it does necrotic
damage. So they're kind of Lich-Lite.

Fell Incanters are Level 18 Elite Artillery with 130 HP and all standard
lingerer traits. They're armed with a **quarterstaff** that also inflicts
ongoing necrotic damage (save ends).

At range they can fire **Soul Bolts** (ranged 10 vs. Fortitude) that deal
necrotic damage and immobilize (save ends). **Double Attack** allows them to
shoot two of these in one action. After they're bloodied, they can also use a
**Soul Blast** (close blast 3 vs. Fortitude; recharge 5+) that does necrotic
damage and weakens until the end of the incanter's next turn.

### Fey-Incanter Vestige

When a fell incanter is destroyed, it becomes one of these. It's a Level 18
Lurker with 91 HP. Its resistances and vulnerabilities are increased by 5 each,
it gains a fly speed, and becomes insubstantial.

Incanter vestiges have no melee attacks. Their basic attack is a **Ray of
Humility** (Ranged 5 vs. Will) doing both immediate and ongoing necrotic
damage. It also inflicts 5e disadvantage (roll 2d20 and take the lowest die) on
the victim's saves, with a successful save ending both this and the ongoing
damage.

There's also **Ray of Spring's Rejection** (ranged 5 vs. Will; recharge 5+),
which does more damage and makes the target grant combat advantage to the
vestige (save ends). And, like the knight vestige, this one deals increased
damage to people granting CA to it.

This results in an enemy that's a bit similar to the knight vestige but with a
ranged focus. It's also a lot harder to save against its CA-granting effect.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is Level 18: two lingerer knights, 1 fell incanter, and a
living bralani of autumn winds who is probably one of the incanter's fan-elves.

I think fey lingerers are really interesting! Though I described them as "Lich
Lite", I actually think they're a bit more flavorful than standard liches, what
with the whole "become a vengeful ghost" mechanic. I always felt D&D 4 could
have done a lot more with such multi-stage enemies.
