---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Warforged"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Warforged are a 3e creation, first appearing as a playable option in the Eberron
campaign setting. In 4e they would also become playable characters, but their
first appearance was in the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

The warforged lore given to us by the Monster Manual has been stripped of all
Eberron-specific information, which means it's extremely terse and generic.

Warforged are living constructs created by magic. The "living" part means
they're gifted with true sapience, and with souls. It also means they're a
little less tough than a golem, but they make up for that with their large
numbers.

Warforged are created in magical factories called Creation Forges. They're
sexless and can't reproduce in any other way. As their name implies, the
original purpose of the warforged was to serve as an army. In peacetime,
individual warforged often end up working as bodyguards and mercenaries for
people who share their individual ideals and disposition.

In Eberron, the secret of building and operating creation forges belonged
exclusively to House Cannith, who sold warforged armies to all five sides of the
Last War but whose main customer was the nation of Cyre. The treaty that ended
the War (signed after Cyre got swallowed by a magical catastrophe) freed all
existing warforged from servitude, and I think it also tightly regulated their
creation.

Most warforged PCs from Eberron are going to be veterans of the Last War, which
is like a combination between our Hundred Years War and World War One. However,
in the ruins of Cyre, a powerful warforged supremacist named the Lord of Blades
controls a fully working creation forge and is using it to build an army.

Warforged in the 4e implied setting might have been alive to see the fall of
Nerath. They could also have been built more recently by someone operating an
Nerathian creation forge, or even assembled by hand by an isolated artificer.

## The Numbers

Monster Manual warforged have seberal
