---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Dragon, Catastrophic"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I've talked a lot about dragons, and why I like their 4e implementation, over
the course of these book readings. Sometimes it feels like no big D&D bestiary
is complete without introducing a new dragon subtype.

The Monster Manual talked about the classic chromatics, which were then updated
on the Monster Vault. You can see what I wrote about them [here][1].

The Monster Manual 2 talked about the equally classic metallics, and you can
read what I wrote about them [here][2].

The Monster Manual 3 introduces the much less famous and much newer Catastrophic
Dragons. I believe they are new to 4e, though they might also have shown up in
some late supplement for a previous edition. You might already have noticed I'm
a bit lazy when it comes to researching monster publication histories.

What I'm sure about is that these are the first 4e dragons that have the
"correct" math from the start. They're also notable for being generally _weaker_
than chromatics and metallics despite the impressive name. Your typical
catastrophic dragon is an Elite monster rather than a Solo.

## The Lore

As we saw in previous articles about dragons, when the god Io was split in two
during the Dawn War his followers also split along ideological lines based on
which of the two new deities they preferred: Tiamat the greedy or Bahamut the
just. I imagine the initial decision was easy for most of them.

For most, but not for all. Some of Io's orphaned followers were gripped by fear
when they saw how easily their lord had been slain, and they decided that the
best way to survive would be to beseech the Primordials for protection and join
their side of the Dawn War. These turncoats were transformed by the "blessings"
of the Primordials into the first catastrophic dragons.

When the Primordials were defeated most surviving catastrophics scattered across
the multiverse and turned to their own selfish purposes. The typical
catastrophic in the present day is somewhat less formidable than a chromatic,
but more outwardly destructive. They tend to live in extremely hostile
environments that befit their individual natures, and from the point of view of
surrounding civilians their behavior looks a lot like that of a natural
disaster: they occasionally emerge to wreak havoc and destruction on people and
their environment, and then return to their lairs for an unknown amount of time.

Legends and myths dating back to the Dawn War tell of catastrophic dragons of
immense size and power, capable of sinking continents and destroying entire
astral domains. No one knows whether these stories are true, and even the gods
refuse to tell.

## The Dragons

This entry is structured a lot like previous dragon entries, with each type of
dragon presented getting stat blocks for all of its age categories. That's about
where it stops, though. Catastrophic dragons are more like personified natural
disasters than like the traditional dragons we saw in previous books.

The ones we see here are clumsy fliers, and even lack the traditional breath
weapon! Instead, they're surrounded by an aura that's like a miniature version
of the disaster they embody. During a fight, this aura grows in size as time
passes and then explodes in a, well, catastrophic manner before returning to its
initial size and beginning the cycle anew.

Despite having bodies largely made up of elemental matter, these dragons lack
any elemental resistances. Instead, damage of their associated type triggers a
reaction ability that punishes the attacker in some form. I would however say
that they are immune to _environmental_ damage of their associated type even
though that's not made explicit in their stat blocks, because it just wouldn't
do for a blizzard dragon to die of frostbite.

The last major mechanical difference between these dragons and their
predecessors is that catastrophics are Elites instead of Solos. Whether this is
just bad luck or a punishment from the gods, it means that fights against them
will include a bigger supporting cast of other monsters.

There are more age categories here than in the previous books: Wyrmling, Young,
Adult, Elder and Ancient. Wyrmlings are Medium in size, and are regular monsters
instead of Elites. Young'uns and Adults are Large, and the last two are Huge. I
guess a wyrmling isn't quite a "baby dragon", but I'd still be a bit wary of
placing them as enemies, as I commented earlier.

Generally speaking catastrophic dragons are clumsy fliers, so they prefer to
fight on the ground. Though their looks and abilities tend to be tied to a
specific element, they usually lack resistance to that element. Instead, they
have special abilities that trigger in response to being hit by attacks that
match their element. They're also surrounded by miniature natural disasters that
occasionally explode!

Despite their thematic link to natural disasters and their destructive demeanor,
catastrophic dragons are typically Unaligned, which says interesting things
about their mindset.

### Blizzard Dragons

Blizzard Dragons were created by Umboras, Lord of the Rimefire. The dragon
petitioners who approached these primordial were the coldest-hearted among their
number. Umboras took them to the coldest reaches of the Elemental Chaos and
entombed them there for a year and a day while he worked his magic on them. When
they emerged, they were blizzard dragons.

Umboras had a specific goal in mind when he did this. He had been an ally of the
winter goddess Khala, who shared with him the goal of freezing the world
solid. However, the Raven Queen had just usurped Khala and claimed the domain of
winter from her, so Umboras was out for revenge. He created blizzard dragons to
help transport his troops to the Raven Queen's new home of Letherna.

The Queen, however, was smarter than him. She retreated to the labyrinthine
astral domain of Pandemonium, and used its twisty little passages (all alike) to
separate Umboras from his main forces and lock him in one of the domain's empty
vaults. He's still there!

The blizzard dragons scattered after their master was imprisoned. Some stayed in
Pandemonium, some returned to the Elemental Chaos, some even went to the coldest
places of the world.

Blizzard dragons don't usually have grand plans of their own, and are usually
content to freeze and sculpt their territories. However, they're surprisingly
good team players and can often be found allied to other creatures of compatible
disposition, helping them achieve their goals. This varies from the usual frost
giants and ice archons to liches or winter fey, depending on the
individual. They're always down for breaking a primordial out of prison.



[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
