---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Panther"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure>
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-panther.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Go [here][1] to see the other entries.

Panthers are real-world animals, and something like them has been in the game
since the beginning. In 4e, they're only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

This is another one of those Monster Manual entries that focuses on fantastical
versions of a mundane animal. The implied setting of D&D does have mundane
panthers, but the book notes that they mostly hunt small game and avoid contact
with people.

However, that setting also has _supernatural_ panthers touched by the energies
of the Feywild and Shadowfell. These are larger, stronger, and have no problem
stalking humanoids that blunder into their hunting grounds. They have powers
that are thematic to their home planes, and can move between them and the world
at sunrise and sunset.

## The Numbers

We get two stat blocks here, one each for fey and shadow panthers.

### Fey Panther

This is a Medium Fey Beast, and a Level 4 Skirmisher with 54 HP. It has trained
Perception and low-light vision, and moves with a ground speed of 8 and a climb
speed of 6.

The fey panther's basic attack is a **Bite** that also allows it to shift 1
square on a hit. Its **Charging Pounce** ability allows it to deal extra damage
and knock the target prone on a charge.

Finally, it can also use **fey step** like an eladrin, teleporting 5 squares
once per encounter.

These abilities add up to a fighting style where the panther tries its best to
not stay engaged with a single target, using the shifts from its basic attack
and the teleport from Fey Step to make sure it's always in position to charge
someone without receiving opportunity attacks.

If you really want a mundane panther, you could remove Fey Step from this one
and maybe lower its level to 3.

### Spectral Panther

Real-world black panthers are jaguars with a specific gene that makes them all
black. D&D black panthers come from the Shadowfell!

Spectral panthers are Medium Shadow Beasts, and Level 9 Lurkers with 76 HP. They
run at speed 7, and oddly seem to lack a climb speed. They have trained
Perception and low-light vision.

Their name comes from the ability to assume a **Spectral Form** as a standard
action, which turns them insubstantial and gives them a +5 bonus to Stealth
(bringing the total up to +19), but makes their attacks deal half damage. Once
in this form, they can use another standard action to turn **Invisible**. Both
conditions can be ended as a free action, and invisibility also ends when the
panther makes an attack.

They attack with their **Claws**, and when an enemy moves or shifts into an
adjacent square they can also use a **Tail Spike** as a reaction. Both attacks
deal extra damage if the panther has Combat Advantage against the target.

Overall, the spectral panther is slightly sub-par as a lurker, because it takes
two turns to become invisible and the combat advantage bonus damage isn't big
enough to make up for that. You're probably better off sticking to
insubstantiality for repositioning, and relying on flanking and such to get
combat advantage. Or you could change **Spectral Form** so it makes the panther
invisible right away.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We have a single sample encounter here, along with the usual statement that lots
of intelligent humanoids end up keeping supernatural panthers as pets and attack
animals.

The encounter is level 9: 2 spectral panthers, a dark stalker, and a pair of
shadar-kai warriors.

Panthers are... okay, I guess. Their existence is a cool bit of color, but they
don't make immediately want to use them in an encounter like other monsters here
did.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
