---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Giants"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The first Monster Manual and the Monster Vault contained plenty of giants, whose
lore in 4e is pretty awesome. I covered their basic lore [here][2], and also had
individual posts for [hill][3], [frost][4], [fire][5], [death][6] and [storm][7]
giants.

The Monster Manual 2 added more giants, and it's actually where Frost Giants
made their first appearance in this edition. We already covered them in the
corresponding post linked above. In this one, we'll cover the two other
varieties introduced in the same entry: Eldritch and Stone giants. The latter
are old standbys, and I had never heard of the formed until now. If they existed
in a previous edition, it was in one of the more out-of-the-way supplements or
Dragon articles for 3e.

## Eldritch Giants

As mentioned in the basic lore post, the primordials made the first Giants from
the same elements they used in the world, to help them shape and understand
it. Well, it turns out _raw magic_ is as much a basic building block of the
world as the more classical elements of earth, fire, air, and water. Therefore,
it got its own Giant type.

Eldritch giants were among the most powerful creations of the Primordials, and
they helped a lot with shaping the flow of magical energies in the still-cooling
world. Today their power is much diminished from what it was at the dawn of
time, and most of them dedicate their lives to accumulating magical power and
knowledge in hopes of returning to those lofty heights.

Both eldritch giants and titans are still well-versed in magic. They know how to
form weapons out of pure force, and they tattoo their bodies with symbols that
allow them to absorb the magic of others and teleport at will. They live near
sources of arcane power, and jealously hoard knowledge and artifacts. Eldritch
giant social hierarchy is based on how much power individuals managed to
accumulate - Eldritch Titans tend to be on top of that. An individual eldritch
giant or titan might have more abilities than what is depicted in the "typical"
stat blocks of this entry, and they'll certainly have access to lots and lots of
magic rituals.

Most interactions between mortals and eldritch giants as written here are likely
to be hostile, since the giants don't have much reason to be friendly. They love
binding and enslaving other creatures with magic, though, so they might be
encountered alongside powerful elementals, slaads, and other such creatures. A
more reasonable group of them would make valuable allies against powerful
incorporeal enemies, though, since they specialize in force magic.

### Eldritch Giant

"Standard" eldritch giants are Large Fey Humanoids with the "giant"
keyword, and Level 18 Skirmishers with 171 HP. They have low-light vision, 10
force resistance, and a +5 bonus to saves vs. charm effects. Their ground speed
is 8 and they also have a teleport speed of 6.

These giants fight in melee with Reach 2 **Eldritch Blades** that target Reflex
and deal force damage, and at range with Range 20 **Force Missiles** that do the
same. Being so large, they can also use **Sweeping Sword** attacks to target
everyone in a Close Blast 2 instead of a single victim, and they can do that
even when charging.

As a minor action, they can deploy an **Eldritch Field** (close blast 5; recharge
5+) that counts as difficult terrain and makes enemies inside take extra damage
from the their attacks. Also as a minor action, they can use **Consume Magic**
to absorb a magic zone created by a PC. This requires them to hit the caster's
Will with an attack, and if they succeed their own attacks get a big damage
boost until the end of their next turn.

### Eldritch Titan

Eldritch Titans are Huge, and Level 21 Elite Skirmishers with 394 HP. They have
the same passive traits as their smaller cousins.

Their Reach 3 **Eldritch Hammers** deal more damage, and they can make two
attacks per action, even on a charge. Their ranged force attack is also stronger
and pushes the target 5 squares on a hit.

Once per encounter they can cast a **Force Hammer** that damages everyone on a
close blast 3, pushes then 3 squares and knocks them prone. On a miss the
targets still take half damage and are pushed. They have the same Consume Magic
and Eldritch Field abilities as eldritch giants.

## Stone Giants

The other type of classic earth giant, Stone Giants are among the most
reasonable people among all giantkind. They usually don't care about raiding or
conquest, and just want to be left alone in their mountain homes. Discrete and
contemplative sorts, they can stay immobile for years while lost in thought, and
are surprisingly adept at hiding themselves in their home terrain.

Someone passing throug stone giant territory might never spot them at all, and
ill-intentioned travelers might find themselves ambushed before they can do any
harm. The exception to all of this is when the giants are feeling rowdy and want
to have some fun: their favorite game is basically dodgeball with enormous
boulders, and when they're in the middle of it they don't usually pay attention
to any smaller creatures who might be in the path of those boulders.

Stone giants are one of the few Giants who are actually on friendly terms with
communities of galeb duhrs and azers. They have a long and proud tradition of
stone carving, and their magic is based on carved runes. It's possible the
dwarves originally learned their own rune-magic from stone giants, though modern
dwarf scholars dispute this notion.

Friendly giants of other types, unable to stand their generally unpleasant
societies, often move in with stone giants. Conversely, evil stone giants tend
to move out of their ancestral homes and throw their lot with their more
villainous relatives.

### Stone Giant

Stone Giants are Large Elemental Humanoids with the Earth and Giant
keywords. They're Level 14 Soldiers with 140 HP, immune to petrification, and
have a ground speed of 8 with Earth Walk. This lets them ignore difficult
terrain with a "geological" origin.

They use giant-sized **stone greatclubs**. As usual for soldiers, their basic
attacks mark on a hit and they can make opportunity attacks marked creatures in
reach that move or shift. They can also make a **Staggering Sweep** that works
like an area attack, pushes targets 2 squares, and marks them. At range, they
can **hurl rocks** like you'd expect out of an old-school giant.

While they're unbloodied, they can use **Stone Bones** as an interrupt when hit
by an attack, gaining 5 resistance do its damage.

### Stone Giant Runecarver

This spellcaster is a Level 16 Controller with 155 HP and the Leader
keyword. Their magic is partly about slowing and immobilizing enemies, and
partly about doing unpleasant things to enemies suffering from those conditions.

They fight in melee with **Enruned Picks**, which are High-Crit weapons and have
a slow (save ends) rider. **Grasping Stone** ensures that any enemy slowed by
the giant is also immobilized for a turn.

Magic-wise, their **Rune of Thundering Echo** (recharge 5+) deals thunder damage
over an area and inflicts ongoing thunder damage (save ends) on targets who are
slowed or immobilized. The **Rune of Stony Sleep** (recharge 6+) affects a
similar area, deals physical damage and slows (save ends). After the first
failed save, slowed enemies become petrified instead (save still ends). That
rune also creates a zone within its affected area that inflicts a -2 penalty
against saves vs. slowness or immobilization effects.

"Save ends" petrification might not sound so bad, but runecarvers also have a
**Hardened Focus** aura (5) that makes all petrified enemies inside lose any
damage resistance they have _and_ gain Vulnerable 5 to all damage. An evil
runecarver is a good counter to a group of PCs who thought a fight against frost
or fire giants was going to be easy just because they packed the right elemental
resistances.

### Stone Titan

Stone Titans are basically Stone Giants Plus, being Huge in size and Level 18
Elite Soldiers with 348 HP. They fight unarmed and throw rocks, but there are
some important differences.

First, their marking ability is a **Slipstone Distortion** aura (1) that marks
any enemy who starts their turn inside. Their **slams** deal extra damage to
marked enemies, and they can make opportunity attacks against marked enemies
like stone giants can.

Second, they can use an **Avalanche Stomp** (encounter) to attack everyone in a
Close Burst 3, with a hit doing heavy damage and causing the very earth to grab
the targets. The escape DC is 28, and the giant doesn't need to spend actions to
sustain the grab. A miss still does half damage.

And third, they can "charge" a thrown rock and turn it into a **Quakestone**
(recharge 5+), making it into an area attack that does light damage, knocks
prone, and dazes (save ends) on a hit. A miss does half damage and knocks prone
without the daze.

## Final Impressions

Eldritch giants have a somewhat unusual name and appearance when compared to the
traditional types, but they're a lot closer to them than it seems at first. I
guess calling them "Force Giants" would have been a little too on the nose, but
this is basically what they are. They use Force attacks in the same way a frost
giant would use Cold, or a fire giant would use Fire. Their fighting style is
similar, aside from the "I eat magic!" thing.

Stone giants on the other hand are one of the traditional types that have been
there since the beginning. I'm happy to see them here because your average stone
giant fits the "Earth Giant" mold a lot more readily than a hill giant, who's
just a big human-looking person. I also like that the book doesn't consider all
of them evil, and even mentioned that they partner up with non-evil individuals
of the other giant types. I often ponder how to make sapient monsters less evil
and hostile when I discuss them, so it's nice to see an entry that does that as
written.

[2]: {{ "/2020/03/30/giants.html" | relative_url }}
[3]: {{ "/2020/04/01/earth-giants.html" | relative_url }}
[4]: {{ "/2020/04/04/frost-giants.html" | relative_url }}
[5]: {{ "/2020/04/06/fire-giants.html" | relative_url }}
[6]: {{ "/2020/04/07/death-giants.html" | relative_url }}
[7]: {{ "/2020/04/10/storm-giants.html" | relative_url }}
