---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Gray Company"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-gray-company.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

The Gray Company are a new, setting-specific faction.

## The Lore

As far as history goes, the fall of Nerath is still a relatively recent
event. Many humans alive today likely have a great-grandparent who was alive
during the final days of that empire. Members of longer-lived species like
elves, dwarves and eladrin might even have witnessed those days
themselves.

So it's no wonder that Nerath has it own share of revivalists who want to
rebuild it to fit the glorious image in their head. In the Nentir Vale, the most
prominent of those groups is known as the Gray Company. Many people in the Vale
consider them nothing more than a well-equipped gang of bandits, but its members
believe themselves to be working towards the rebirth of their glorious
empire. Their singular focus on this goal makes them a dour and humorless
bunch, seemingly always covered with the dust of ages even when their equipment
is new.

The Company is made up primarily of humans, who were the dominant people of
Nerath. It is led by one Halvath Cormarrin, a man who claims to be a scion of
Nerath's royal line. It recruits people from across the Nentir Vale, spreading
stories of the glories of the old empire and inviting those most fascinated by
them to join up. Once a recruit joins up, they're in for life. Deserters are
hunted down, executed by hanging, and left on display on crossroads, as the old
law dictates.

The Company's HQ is located in the Gray Downs, a region thick with Nerathi ruins
and artifacts. Much of their time and effort is spent exploring these ruins and
recovering these artifacts which they consider theirs by right. Cormarrin is
particularly interested in finding old pieces of regalia like the Sword of
Nerath and the Threefold Crown, since possessing them would increase the
legitimacy of his claim.

Anyone who steals these objects (whether from Company itself or from the ruins
they consider their territory) is ruthlessly pursued. Particularly resourceful
thieves are invited to join up and lend their skills to the Company's
cause. Others, including those who refuse the invitation, are executed in
manners prescribed by old Nerathi law.

Company members are trained, equipped and organized to the standards of the
Nerathi military, or as close as Cormarrin can manage those. This means they
also count plenty of battle mages among their number. Their magic specializes in
controlling the pervasive mist of the Gray Downs, with a large side order of
artifice (to get those recovered magic items working again) and necromancy (to
get those old fallen heroes of Nerath working again).

Other chapters of the Gray Company have begun appearing in other regions of the
Vale, each of them led by a self-proclaimed prince of old Nerath. If these
groups all got together under one banner, they could become a formidable army
with a real chance of achieving their goal... but they feud with each other as
much or more as they fight their actual enemies, so their overall progress
remains minimal. As some jokers say, this too is a grand Nerathi tradition.

## The Numbers

Gray Company members are all in the late Heroic Tier, meaning they haven't quite
broken through to "regional power" status. All of the stat blocks here represent
humans, which make up the majority of their soldiers.

Their signature trait is **Grim Solidarity**. If someone with this trait starts
their turn adjacent to another creature with this trait, they can make a saving
throw against one effect that a save can end. All Company members have this,
which means they're difficult to debuff when in formation.

### Gray Company Recruit

Recruits joined relatively recent, so their training and gear is not yet up to
the standards of the Company. They already have Grim Solidarity, though. They're
Level 7 Minion Artillery armed with **short swords** and **short bows**. If they
score a critical hit, **Inspired Fervor** lets them make a free basic attack
against the same enemy with a +2 bonus to hit.

### Gray Company Soldier

A veteran who earned the right to carry a sword of genuine Nerathi make. Armored
in plate, he's a Level 7 Soldier with 80 HP. His basic attack with that
**Ancient Longsword** has no riders, but whenever an adjacent enemy makes an
attack that doesn't include the veteran as a target, he can use **Strike of the
Ancient Blade** to make a free sword attack against them that also pushes the
enemy and knocks it prone.

If an ally of the soldier drops to 0 HP within 5 squares of him, he can react
**For the Glory of Old Nerath** (encounter) and make an attack in a Close Burst
1 that deals more damage than a basic strike and inflicts 5 ongoing damage (save
ends).

### Gray Company Fallen Hero

Either an actual Nerathi soldier whose body was exhumed and reanimated, or a
modern day Gray Company veteran who died in combat and was "re-upped" for a
second term of service. In either case, this results in a sapient undead
revenant who likely has no memory of its previous self. It's a Level 6 Brute
with 89 HP. It has Grim Solidarity, Darkvision and the standard undead traits
(immune to poison and disease, resistant to necrotic, vulnerable to radiant).

The fallen hero's **Longsword** deals necrotic damage and inflicts Vulnerable 5
Necrotic for a turn. It can invoke **Nerath's Vengeance** to make a sword attack
against every adjacent enemy, and this recharges once it's bloodied.

### Halvath Cormarrin

The leader of the Gray Company is a Level 8 Elite Brute with the Leader tag and
214 HP. In addition to having Grim Solidarity, he can exhort his underlings to
fight **Until the Last Breath**, which acts as an Aura 5 that allows allies
inside to make one last free attack when they drop to 0 HP.

Cormarrin wields an **Ancient Rune Flail** and can make **Double Attacks** with
it. He can also use swing it around and have the **Rune Flail's Arc** attack
everyone in a Close Burst 1. A hit deals the same damage as a basic attack,
pushes the target 1 square, and knocks it prone. A miss deals half damage and
pushes 1 square. Good move to escape being surrounded.

Once per encounter, Cormarrin can use **Cry of Glory** to turn a normal hit by
an ally within 10 squares into a critical.

## Final Impressions

Like Dythan's Legion, the Gray Company is a faction modeled after the army of a
fallen empire whose main goal lies in the restoration of that empire. The Legion
can more than match them man-for-man, but the Company probably has more
soldiers, particularly if you tally all the different chapters together. They
might skirmish near the shores of Lake Nen.

Other possible sources of conflict for the Company include the Barrowhaunts, who
probably were Nerathi when alive, and also claim the Gray Downs as their
territory. Other interesting monsters also make their home there, as we'll soon
see.

Ironically, if Dythan's Legion ever decides the Gray Company is a threat that
must be eliminated, the resulting large-scale confrontation is probably going to
unite the Company's disparate chapters around a common enemy and make that
assessment into a self-fulfilling prophecy. As it is, I'm sure many of the
Company's "princes", Cormarrin chief among them, would just love to hire the
Gravelstoke family to help secure their claim as the true heir to
Nerath. Whether the Family ever takes one of them up on the offer will depend on
what you want for your campaign.

A truly unified Gray Company would finally become the regional power they want
to be, and this might merit bumping their levels up to the Paragon tier. Do the
PCs accept this new order, or to they fight it?
