---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Cadaver Collector"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I'm pretty sure I saw these in a 3e supplement somewhere, but there's a nifty
bonus stat block here that ties them to the Nentir Vale.

## The Lore

Cadaver Collectors are specialized golems first built by ancient necromancers to
provide them with a supply of corpses. Their metal-plated bodies are covered in
long spikes that they use to impale collected corpses for transport and
delivery. They were commonly sent to "clear" battlefields after a battle had
ended.

Like all golems they're pretty good at performing the job they were designed for
and at following instructions related to it, but they can't do anything else
well. This is why no one sent them to fight in those battles. They only follow
the orders of their current master, or those of a person who also serves that
master.

The original recipe for cadaver collectors was repeatedly lost and rediscovered
over the ages, and though no one in the Nentir Vale knows how to build one in
our narrative present there are several old ones still around in the wild. Many
of them are located somewhere within the Witchlight Fens, a swampy region in the
south-central Vale.

When a collector's master dies it will usually fulfill the last order it was
given and then stand by waiting for more. If someone happens to die in their
assigned area in the meantime, they will dutifully go out to collect the
bodies. If someone manages to convince the collector they work for the
collector's master, the creature will obey their orders.

After enough time waiting for orders that never come, their programming might
mutate a bit, giving them a bit more initiative. Some collectors decide to go
looking for a new master to serve. Others decide to broaden their mission
parameters and consider living creatures valid targets for collection.

There's a hobgoblin necromancer named Gokof living in the Witchlight Fens who is
unusually skilled at convincing ancient cadaver collectors to work for him. He's
nominally a member of the Daggerburg goblin tribe but spends most of his time
away from them and in the company of his collectors and undead servants. He
rarely has more than two collectors working for him at any one time, but never
seems to have trouble finding more to replace them.

### The Numbers

We get two stat blocks here, one for a cadaver collector and one for Gokof.

### Cadaver Collector

These constructs are Large Natural Animates and Level 9 Elite Soldiers with 200
HP and a speed of 8. They're immune to charm, disease, and poison, and have
Resist Lightning 10. They are somewhat weak to thunder damage: whenever they
take thunder damage, they become slowed (save ends).

Collectors attack with **Slams** that deal physical damage and grab on a hit
(escape DC 20). They can grab one Large creature or up to four Small creatures
at once. As an elite it can perform **Double Slams**.

The collector can also spend its action to **Impale** a grabbed creature. This
deals massive damage, pulls them into the collector's space, restrains them, and
inflicts 10 ongoing damage (save ends all). When the collector moves, the
creature is pulled along, and when the effect ends, the creature reappears in an
adjacent space.

You might have noticed that there's a limit to how many creatures a collector
can _grab_, but not to how many it can _impale_. It's not going to matter much
in practice, because it's highly unlikely a collector will impale the whole
party at once. However, if it ever becomes relevant I'm inclined to say their
impaling limit is the same as the one for grabs. A fully loaded collector would
have four Medium cadavers impaled and another four grabbed. And would probably
have more than the two arms depicted in the illustration.

Finally, the collector can **Trample** once per encounter like the big chungus
it is. The rules are as usual: it moves its speed and can cross enemy spaces
while doing so, making an attack that deals heavy physical damage and knocks
prone against every enemy whose space they cross.

Collectors fight by pretty much applying their programming to the PCs. Grab
impale, repeat. When fully loaded, trample to retreat.

### Gokof, Hobgoblin Necromancer

Gokof is a Level 9 Controller (Leader). He has speed 6 and low-light vision from
being a hobgoblin. He wields a **Staff** as both weapon and implement, and has
an array of necromantic spells at his disposal.

His basic ranged attack is a **Necrotic Ray** that deals necrotic damage on a
hit and slows for a turn as an effect. Anything that happens "as an effect"
always happens, regardless of whether the attack hits or not! Less often
(recharge 5+) he can cast **Sapping Tendrils** as a ranged area attack. This is
not selective, and on a hit it deals necrotic damage, immobilizes, and inflicts
ongoing necrotic damage (save ends).

Instead of casting a spell, Gokof can use **Command Animate** to order an
animate ally to make a melee basic attack as a free action. Cadaver collectors
are animates, of course, and so are a lot of undead.

Once per encounter, when an enemy within 5 squares of Gokof regains HP, the
necromancer can use **Dark Healing** to automatically deal them a chunk of
necrotic damage and recover 24 HP himself.

## Final Impressions

I like the addition of Gokof to this entry. It helps establish a concrete
situation where cadaver collectors appear in the Nentir Vale. It's more than
even most other setting-specific monster books do. Those usually just say "these
monsters exist in this setting".
