---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Imix, Part 1"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Sit down dear readers, for there's a lot of lore coming your way. Imix himself
first appeared in the Fiend Folio for AD&D 1e, along with the other Elemental
Princes. His writeup here also melds two classic stories from the 1e era.

## The Lore

So, as it's been mentioned a few times before, the god Tharizdun is probably the
most evil asshole in all of 4e's implied setting. Before even the Dawn War, he
came across a shard of cosmic evil, and decided to use that in a bid to conquer
the universe. He planted this shard in the Elemental Chaos as if it was a seed,
and from this seed sprouted the Abyss. Tharizdun used the Abyss to generate an
innumerable host of demons. Some of these were created through corruption (of
elementals, of his own servants, and others). Others were formed directly from
abyssal energies under Tharizdun's direction.

A lot of things happened after that but it suffices to say that Tharizdun's
attempt at conquest ultimately failed and the god was imprisoned by his peers in
the most secure prison they could conceive. His name was erased from all records
of the gods, some say from reality itself. We only know it because we're the
readers and we're outside the setting.

Fast-forward to the time of the Dawn War. The gods are slowly winning, for they
are capable of teamwork and their proud enemies are not. Except, that is, for a
group of 5 Primordials who were contacted by a mysterious entity that introduced
itself as the Elder Elemental Eye. The contacted Primordials believed they had
just lucked into a direct line to the _first_ Primordial, and so they readily
accepted its offer of power in exchange for loyalty. They called themselves the
Elemental Princes from that point onward.

The alliance between the Elemental Princes was far from ironclad, but it was
enough to allow them to get through the War with both their lives and their
freedom. They're still out there, in the Elemental Chaos, plotting to overthrow
the gods and free their master.

Spoiler alert: The Elder Elemental Eye is a pseudonym for Tharizdun. Serving and
worshipping the Eye funnels power to the Chained God so that he might one day
break free of his prison.

This entry concerns Imix, the Evil Elemental Prince of Fire. As the name
implies, he represents all the bad things one usually associates with
fire. Uncontrolled passions, rage, indiscriminate destruction. Though he is
technically free, Imix lives in a state of self-imposed house arrest. He has a
stronghold built into the caldera of an active volcano, and he never leaves
it. His attempts to influence the world and advance his plan all go through his
agents and cultists.

Imix's cult in the middle world is unusually large and active for a
primordial's. It accepts misanthropes, murderers, and those who are angry at the
world and willing to swear any oath for the power to take revenge. Whatever
their individual reasons might be, they eventually cease to matter, as advancing
in the cult means having pieces of your free will burned away until your only
wish is to do Imix's bidding and help free the Eye.

They usually hide out among sapient communities and sow division and discord,
encouraging its inhabitants to rebel and fight among themselves. Their temples
tend to be built inside ruins and other scary places. The cultists protect them
vigilantly and burn to death anyone who gets too close.

More important temples are usually dedicated to the Elder Elemental Eye and
protected by two or more Elemental Prince cults, who spend as much time
sabotating and upstating one another as they do actually advancing the Eye's
cause. The cult's greatest seat of power is the legendary Temple of Elemental
Evil, protected and operated by all the Elemental Prince cults and any
mercenaries and servants they manage to recruit.

## The Monsters

This entry contains stats both for Imix himself and for a wide range of cultists
and servitors that go from mid-Heroic to late Epic. Describing them all in one
post would make it into a formidable wall of text, so I'm breaking them up a
bit. This introduction post ends here. The next one will have the cultists in
order of level, and the final one will have Imix himself. See you there!

I'm going to list them in order of increasing level with Imix at the end, which
is not exactly how the book does it.
