---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Ashmadai"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

Since before the cataclysm that destroyed the city, the Neverwinter region was
being infiltrated by the Ashmadai, a particularly powerful cult of
Asmodeus. There's a lot of backstory here, which seems to tie into to a Drizz't
novel. Let's try to go over it quickly.

So back before the Cataclysm, the Ashmadai mostly worked as flunkies for the
Thayans, because the Thayan leader Szass Tam had in his possession a scepter
believed to be an unholy relic of Asmodeus. They were the wizards' muscle when
they tried to destroy Neverwinter to build the Dread Ring, their super
necromantic fortress.

After that plan fell through in a Drizz't novel, the Thayans fled the area and
left the Ashmadai to their own devices until recently, when this Thayan lich
named Valindra came back and announced she was the unholy scepter's new owner,
demanding the cultists' loyalty.

The cult now finds itself split into two sub-factions:

The traditionalists are older and less educated, and serve out of genuine faith
in their evil god. They're okay with going back to being Thayan flunkies because
of the scepter. They're led by a dwarf named Favria.

The "new guard" is less religious and a lot more pragmatic. They want to retain
their independence and rule the region themselves. They're led by a tiefling
named Mordai Vell.

## Goals

Those two sub-factions are actually quite friendly with each other. Their
leaders meet regularly, even though their lower-ranking members have no
contact. Favria is happy to back Vell's plans to acquire the scepter and leave
the Thayans' service. Vell also wants to capture Valindra's soul vessel, which
will let him extract some payback from the lich for all the abuse she has been
heaping upon them.

Once they've attained their independency, the Ashmadai plan to move on to
dominating the region. What exactly this means is up to the GM, and will inform
their strategies. Do they want to rule the region openly as its new imperial
masters? Do they want to establish themselves as a "legitimate" religion and
rule that way? Do they want to be a power behind the throne? Do they want to
harness Maegera's power to do so?

That said, the Ashmadai are by far the weakest of the major factions from this
book, so a lot of their more immediate goals revolve around fixing that and
avoiding the notice of the others.

The pragmatist faction operates mostly from the shadows. Mordai Vell established
a complex system of cells or "pods", where the highest-ranking leaders report to
him but don't know each other, and this structure repeats down each leader's
hierarchy.

The traditionalist faction is more direct and violent, though they mostly keep
out of town unless called upon. In areas already under their control, they paint
their symbol on buildings and alleys as a way to remind the local populace who's
boss.

Like the aboleths, the Ashmadai are fond of kidnapping people. Their victims
become sacrifices in a peculiar arrangement they have with their diabolic
patron. For each devil they summon into the world, they must also bind a mortal
to a devil's spirit. These possessed individuals can look like mortals while
using devil stats, or use their original stats with the addition of a couple of
thematic powers. Whether it's possible to rescue them from this possession is up
to the GM.

## Player Tie-Ins

The Devil's Pawn is on a collision course with the Ashmadai, who will make big
efforts to recruit them. They will also go after people who look like they can
rise to positions of power in Neverwinter, like the Noble.

Whether the cult tries to actively recruit the PCs or not, they can certainly
use their services against the aboleth menace. PCs who would never accept
working with diabolists might be approached by disguised agents intending to
point them at their enemies.

## Relationships

The Ashmadai are hard at work trying to infiltrate New Neverwinter, but they
haven't managed to make any progress with Mayor Soman Galt (who, as we saw, is a
pawn of the aboleths already). Mordai himself is busily trying to convert
General Sabine of New Neverwinter to his cause, and has a good shot of managing
this as her natural disposition is compatible with the cult.

The Abolethic Sovereignity is the competition, and they're ahead. The cultists
ideally want to seal the chasm leading to their base, or otherwise drive them
off permanently, but they're not even close to accomplishing this. The only
reason the Ashmadai are still around is that the aboleths don't consider them a
serious threat.

As mentioned above, the Ashmadai are nominally serving the Thayans while looking
for a way to break free of that servitude. They only do the minimum to prevent
Valindra from suspecting them, but their rebellious plot is doomed to failure as
Valindra does not have that relic scepter any more - she shipped it back to
Szass Tam as soon as she was done showing it off.

The cult looks at the Netherese with much more genuine awe, though. They've
begun holding secret talks to forge an alliance, though they're still having to
keep that hidden from the Thayans.

## Encounters

The enemy table here includes Heroic-tier devils and cambions from several
books, and also several humanoid opponents that could be reskinned as
cultists. We also get a few new stat blocks for cultists and devils, and for the
cult's leaders.

### Seared Devil

Looking like a stinky burned corpse, this devil hurls itself at its victims,
driven by envy of their uncooked state. It's a Level 3 Soldier with 50 HP, speed
5, and Resist 10 Fire. Its basic attack is an **Ashen Slam** that damages and
marks for a turn on a hit. Enemies that ignore the mark are hit by the **Choking
Ashes** power, taking 5 fire damage and getting slowed for a turn.

### Branded Zealot

Those who get initiated into the cult are branded with the symbol of
Asmodeus. Most of them use this stat block. The typical zealot has a frightful
temper and is easily goaded into fights. They're Level 4 Brutes with 66 HP.

Zealots attack in melee with a **Branding Iron** that deals fire damage, and at
range with a Range 3 **Hellfire Chain** spell that deals fire damage, pulls 2
squares, and slows for a turn on a hit.

Their special move is named **Bow to Your Master**, and it lets them do a
Hellfire chain attack followed by a Branding Iron attack if the target is
adjacent to them. It recharges when neither attack hits. If both of them do, the
target falls prone.

## Hellfire Warlock

A more discreet cultist, who got infernal warlock powers from deals with
Asmodeus. They're better at concealing their brands and like to infiltrate enemy
centers to spy and sabotage them. They're Level 4 Artillery with 48 HP.

The warlock's **Hellfire Affinity** gives them +2 to defenses against enemies
who are taking ongoing fire damage. Both of their basic attacks (a **dagger**
for melee and a **Hellfire** bolt for ranged combat) damage and inflict ongoing
fire damage (save ends).

Once per encounter they can release a **Concussive Inferno** in a Close
Burst 2, targeting enemies. On a hit, this deals fire and force damage, pushes
the targets 2 squares, and knocks them prone. On a miss it still deals half
damage and pushes 2 squares.

If a creature within 10 squares of the warlock is taking fire damage, they can
**Ride the Fire** as a move action (recharge 5+) and teleport to swap places
with them.

## Fimbrul Devil

Looks just like a seared devil, but is cold. These things hail from Nessus or
Cania, and it is said that someone who survives a fight with them suffers from
persistent chills for years afterwards. They're Level 5 Controllers with 66 HP,
Speed 6 with Ice Walk, and Resist 10 to both fire and cold damage.

Their **Icy Claws** deal cold damage; their **Icy Exhalation** hits a Close
Blast 3, deals cold damage, and slows for a turn. Targets that were already
slowed are instead immobilized. Once per encounter they can encase a creature in
a **Frozen Prison** as a ranged attack, which deals cold damage and restrains
(save ends). On a miss, the target takes half damage and is immobilized (save
ends).

## Mordai Vell

The pleasant face of the cult, Mordai Vell is a tiefling aristocrat descended
from one of Neverwinter's minor noble clans that was largely unaffected by the
cataclysm. This doesn't give him a claim to the throne, but does leave him with
a lot of inherited wealth. His money and title make him an influent character in
the city's politics, and his public reputation is generally good because he's
almost as charismatic as he thinks he is. He sees Asmodeus not as his master,
but as a means to an end.

In addition to the deals and schemes detailed above, Vell is also dealing with a
duergar named Nimor Ironvoice who claims to have access to a source of
hellthorn, a special metallic alloy that is very easy to enchant with infernal
magic. He has people following Ironvoice around for a while now, but the duergar
is careful enough to avoid revealing his sources.

When faced in combat, Vell is a Level 6 Lurker with 60 HP and Resist 10
Fire. His basic melee attack is with a **rod** that damages and pushes 2
squares, but his special powers are the most interesting part about him.

**Fiery Corona** attacks a Close Burst 2, dealing fire and force damage and
inflicting ongoing fire damage. **Shrouded in Fire** deals 5 automatic fire
damage to everyone adjacent to Mordai and lets him become invisible and teleport
5 squares. He remains invisible until he attacks or until the end of his next
turn. Using one of these powers recharges the other, so he's going to alternate
them if possible.

## Favria

Favria had been enslaved by a far-away band of Asmodeus-worshiping duergar since
her birth. She escaped their service, but kept their faith. She made her way to
Neverwinter to search for Gauntlgrym, joining up with the local cult and rising
to a leadership position mostly through force and intimidation.

If Vell is the pleasant lie, Favria is the harsh reality of Asmodeus
worship. Instead of lies and intrigue, she prefers to deal with problems by the
direct application of violence. Still, she sees value in his way of doing
things, and cooperates by keeping herself and her underlings mostly out of
Neverwinter proper. They have a hideout in the ruins of the village of
Thundertree.

Unlike Vell, Favria knows exactly what the unholy relic of Asmodeus held by the
Thayans is capable of, which is why she is so intent on recovering it. She's
also still looking for Gauntlgrym. She is unaware that it's currently occupied
by Asmodeus-worshiping duergar, and her reaction to that discovery is
unpredictable. Will she readily cooperate with her fellows in faith, or will she
try to kill them to avenge her suffering at the hands of a similar group?

Favria is a Level 5 Skirmisher with 68 HP. She has Resist 5 to fire and poison,
and fights using a pair of custom **bladed hand crossbows** that can be used in
melee or at range. The melee attack deals extra damage if the target grants
combat advantage, and the ranged attack fires **poisoned bolts** that damage and
inflict ongoing poison damage (save ends). **Dual Assault** lets her make one of
each attack once per encounter, recharging if neither hits.

## Impressions

As far as major factions go the Ashmadai are kinda weak. All of their major
goals and strategies lead them down a path that ends in a face-first collision
with one of the factions. They can't recover the scepter because it's not here
any more. They can't corrupt New Neverwinter because the aboleths got there
first. The direct approach to conquest doesn't work because all the other
would-be conquerors are stronger.

Of course, there's a small chance that campaign events and PC actions end up
giving them some sort of major win (like letting Mordai Vell successfully sway
Sabine to their side), which would bump their threat rating considerably.

Still, if I wanted to ensure the Ashmadai had a bit of staying power, I'd
probably tone down Mordai Vell's personality. As written, his demeanor is so
Trump-like any players here in 2023 will immediately figure out he's a bad guy
and do their best to gank him early. That might bring some attention from the
other factions, but would remove the cult itself as an effective threat.
