---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Dwarf"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

It's customary for Fourth Edition monster books to include entries for playable
species. After all, they may show up as enemies or allies. In this book, they
also serve to flesh out some of the Dark Sun-specific story of each species. As
you can see from the illustration, dwarves here are a little different.

## The Lore

Dwarves probably had a pretty typical culture in Athas' distant past, as the
book says they ruled "great mountain kingdoms". However, the genocidal wars of
the Red Age pretty much destroyed their civilization. While modern-day dwarves
are still extremely resilient and dedicated workers, the secret of reading and
writing the Dwarven language has been lost. While you can still find Davek runes
in their ruins, no one alive knows how to read them.

The book kinda conflates this with dwarves not knowing how to read at all, and
therefore not knowing any magic, but that's a giant leap that I think is
incorrect. Written Dwarven is a lost language, but Common and a lot of others
still have written forms and magic lore doesn't have to be encoded in
Dwarven. I'd say dwarves are as likely to be literate and to know magic rituals
as any other person in this setting.

True, when you're talking about typical civilians that's still not very likely,
but Dwarven PCs and major NPCs will still be literate. And it does sound
flavorful for modern dwarven culture to include an element of pride about not
needing magic to do their work.

Dwarves are a fairly common people. Every city state has hundreds or thousands
of dwarven laborers and artisans, both free and enslaved. They also live in
small communities in the wastes, some of which are also mining camps. Whether
your interaction with them is peaceful or violent depends entirely on the
behavior of the PCs and on the objectives of that specific group.

## The Numbers

Despite the differences, Athasian dwarves are still Medium Natural Humanoids
with a ground speed of 5 and Low-Light Vision, just like the ones from the
PHB. They retain the PC traits that make them hard to move: **Stand the Ground**
and **Steady-Footed**, which reduce forced movement by 1 and let them roll a
save against being knocked prone, respectively. They also have +5 to saves
against poison.

Earlier editions spent a lot of time describing how each dwarf had an obsessive
focus on one kind of task, to the point where it restricted their actions. That
makes an appearance here but it's not as dominant as before.

### Dwarf Conscript

Technically a civilian, the conscript still has a body hardened by countless
hours of heavy labor, and will not hesitate to pick up weapons in defense of
their mine or their home. This is a Level 2 Brute with 47 HP, wearing hide armor
and wielding a Dark Sun polearm known as a "gouge", which is basically a
sharpened shovel.

The **gouge** is a standard brute attack, but if it scores a critical hit it
also pushes the target 1 square and knocks it prone.

The conscript also has a **Singular Focus** minor action that's the last vestige
of the 2e rules. This lets the conscript choose an enemy as the target of their
focus, and gain +5 damage against that enemy while they remain the conscript's
focus.

The power recharges when the chosen enemy drops to 0 HP, and it lasts until the
end of the encounter or until the conscript uses it again. It makes the
conscript punch _way_ above their weight class when attacking their chosen
enemy, and is a very nice incentive to behave obsessively in a fight. Since they
can only switch focus when the previous enemy dies, targeted enemies should keep
away to make the conscript waste actions chasing them.

### Dwarf Sunpriest

Modern dwarven religion venerates primal spirits and elementals, particularly
those associated with the sun. Sun priests are venerated spiritual and political
leaders among them, and often lead other dwarves into battle when necessary.

The Sunpriest is Level 5 Artillery with 52 HP and the Leader tag. They wear hide
armor and wield a mace in one hand and a totem in the other. Their basic melee
attack is a **Burning Mace** that deals fire damage, and their main ranged
attack is a **Bright Ray** (ranged 10) that deals radiant damage and inflicts a
-2 attack penalty on the target for a turn.

Once per encounter they can apply a **Sun Blessing** to an ally within 5
squares. That ally regains 10 HP, deals 5 extra fire damage with their attacks
for a turn, and any enemy that hits them in the same time span takes 5 fire
damage.

### Dwarf War Chief

Despite the name, not all war chiefs are commanders, but they're all renowned
champions. They're Level 6 Elite Soldiers with 144 HP.

The war chief fights with a **Greatclub** made from giant bone, and its basic
attacks grant them 5 temporary HP. Their **Spinning Club** maneuver (recharge
5+) attacks enemies in a Close Burst 1. If it hits an enemy marked by the war
chief, that enemy is immobilized until the start of the warchief's next turn.

And how do they mark enemies? Via **Battlefield Focus**, a minor action that
lets them automatically mark up to 2 enemies within 10 squares. It recharges
when one of these enemies drops to 0 HP.

If a marked enemy adjacent to the war chief moves, shifts, or makes an attack,
**Brutal Club** gives the dwarf a basic attack against them as an interrupt,
which also immobilizes for a turn on a hit. This triggers _even if the enemy
attacks the war chief_, and even if the enemy makes one of those moves that
doesn't provoke opportunity attacks. This means it's more powerful than a PC
fighter's Combat Challenge.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

Dwarves can be part of any encounter group whose theme is "a bunch of people",
be they villainous, allied, or bystanders. Dwarven communities, like everyone
else, also domesticate a number of Athasian beasts that might see use in a
fight.

I like these stat blocks! They're low-level but each has some very interesting
tricks they can use. The "focus" powers ended up being more useful than I
thought at first.
