---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Slaad"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Slaads have appeared in every 4e Monster Manual so far. This one gives us more
exotic varieties.

## The Lore

Basic slaad lore remains the same: technically sapient frog-like monsters from
the Elemental Chaos with lolrandom minds and a propensity to implant eggs into
other creatures. You can see the lore specific to each new variety in their
descriptions below.

## The Monsters

As a reminder, chaos phage is a level 16 disease that represents being implanted
with a slaad egg. Stage 1 has no effect beyond this, stage 2 gives you a Will
penalty and makes you attack randomly while bloodied, stage 3 means the embryo
bursts out of your skull and kills you.

Like other diseases it's not hard to remove with the right ritual, but the
symptoms are severe enough that you'll want to do it sooner rather than
later. And as usual the ritual takes time and costs a bunch of healing surges,
so it's something that might add time pressure to a slaad focused adventure.

### Golden Slaad

Slaads are mostly immune to the chaos storms that often rage through portions of
the Elemental Chaos, which is why they like to follow these storms around. When
one of these storms manages to affect a slaad, it can mutate it into a golden
slaad. Golden Slaads are revered by their chromatic brethren, who follow them
around as if they were a chaos storm themselves.

Golden slaads are even more chaos-infused than their relatives, and can inject
that raw chaos in any victims they bite. Their gold-colored forms are unstable,
and if they're wounded they became unable to sustain those forms, becoming
quivering (but still dangerous!) piles of ooze.

These creatures are Huge Elemental Humanoids and Level 20 Controllers with 193
HP. They have a ground speed of 8 and a teleport speed of 6, as well as
low-light vision and an immunity to chaos phage (like all slaads).

Their **bite** is reach 3 and deals physical damage, with a random rider
depending on the result of the attack roll. If the roll is odd, it slides the
target 3 squares. If it's even, it dazes them for a turn.

They can also emit **Chaos Croaks** in a Close Burst 5 (recharge 5+). This
targets Will, does psychic damage, and has a random rider rolled on a d6 table:

1. Target is teleported 1d6 squares in a random direction (rolled on a d8).

2. Target makes a melee basic attack against a random creature adjacent to it.

3. Target is stunned for a turn.

4. Target is slowed (save ends).

5. Target takes an extra 10 damage of a random elemental type rolled on a d10.

6. Target is exposed to chaos phage, and if it was dazed by the slad it becomes
   stunned instead (save ends).

When the slaad is first bloodied it suffers an **Amniotic Transformation** and
becomes an ooze. It becomes unable to teleport and its speed drops to 4, but it
gains a **Corrosive Pseudopodia** attack that can be used as an opportunity
action against any adjacent enemy who moves or makes an attack. It deals minor
acid damage and grabs the target on a hit. With a minor action, the slaad can
sustian all of its grabs, deal acid damage to the victims, and regain 5 HP per
grabbed victim. So the loss of speed isn't that crippling, because the slaad now
_wants_ people to get adjacent to it. And it still retains the use of its other
attacks!

### Putrid Slaad

This is an undead slaad. While it's most often created on purpose by powerful
necromancers, it can also arise naturally when a slaad dies in the Abyss. These
"natural" putrid slaads have a tendency to obey demon lords, so you bet Orcus
loves them.

The putrid slaad loses its ability to spread chaos phage, but it still fights
very similarly to a living one. It will even eat its victims. The remains rot
inside its non-functional guts, and then the monster vomits them when it attacks
its _next_ victims.

Putrid Slaads are Large Elemental Animates (Undead), and Level 19 Brutes with
227 HP. Its basic **Claw** attack pulls the target 1 square, and **Graping
Claws** allows it to make 2 of those with a single action. If both attacks hit,
the slaad grabs the victim.

Once the putrid slaad has grabbed someone, it will hit them with its **Horrific
Spew** (recharge 6), which deals both immediate and ongoing acid and necrotic
damage (save ends). The spew can also be used as a Close Blast 3 attack, but it
has a +2 to-hit bonus when focused on the grabbed victim.

The slaad can also **cast aside** its grabbed victim, pushing them 5 squares,
dealing some automatic physical damage to the victim, and using it to make an
area attack against anyone adjacent to the victim when it lands.


## Personal Impressions

More slaads. As far as late-edition slaads go, these are pretty cool
mechanically. Golden Slaads finally deliver the promised dose of pure chaos
people expect when they first read the slaad's basic lore, and putrid slaads
have this cool cycle of grabbing people and tossing them aside, with an
occasional dose of disgusting barf.
