---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Eladrin"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

## The Lore

Physically, Athasian eladrin are very similar to the standard variety, but the
near-total loss of their home plane has done a number on their psychology and
culture.

Defiling magic didn't just destroy Athasian ecosystems - they also dissolved its
Feywild. Now only a few rare pocket dimensions remain, scattered like oases
through the wastes. The fate of the Lands Within the Wind is still tied to that
of Athas, which means they're slowly dying just like the world is.

Similarly, Athasian Eladrin are a traumatized and dying people. Most of the ones
that remain live in remote castles and settlements in the desert or inside
surviving pockets of Feywild, guarding the entrance to their realms with psychic
illusions and only venturing out when they must.

## The Numbers

Eladrin have the same common stats as always: they're Medium Fey Humanoids with
a Speed of 6, Low-light vision and a +5 on saves vs. charm effects. They retain
their signature **Fey Step** power, which lets them teleport 5 squares as a move
action once per encounter.

These stat blocks occupies what would be the lower range of eladrin power levels
from the Monster Manuals and Monster Vault. There are no more epic-level ghaeles
and bralanis in Athas, probably.

### Eladrin Veiled Warriors

Veiled Warriors are spies and scouts that range far away from Eladrin
settlements to gather information and locate resources, thought hey can also be
found as part of their homes' defense force. This is a great origin for PCs!

NPC Veiled Warriors are Level 5 Soldiers with 60 HP. They fight with
Reach 2 **Longspears** that damage and mark for a turn on a hit. Once per
encounter they can use a **Veiling Dart** (ranged 5 vs. Will) which deals
psychic damage, blinds for a turn and slows (save ends).

### Eladrin Mirage Adept

These are the psions responsible for hiding Eladrin settlements. They're Level 7
Controllers with 80 HP and a focus on illusion powers.

Their basic melee attack is a **Dagger** that deals psychic damage and slows for
a turn. They can attack at range with **Deluding Whispers** (ranged 10
vs. Will), a charm power that deals psychic damage, slides 3 squares and
prevents the target from seeing creatures not adjacent to it for a turn.

Occasionally they'll strike with the **Phantom Foes** power (recharge 6, area 2
within 20 vs. Will), which I guess projects the illusion that many additional
foes are attacking the targets. This "psychic fireball" deals psychic damage and
confuses (save ends). Confused characters roll a d20 whenever they're about to
make a melee or ranged attack and an ally is also in reach of that attack. On a
10 or higher, they attack the ally instead of the intended target.

Mirage adepts are very effective when combined with veiled warriors, because the
warriors use reach weapons and so don't need to be adjacent to a target blinded
by Deluding Whispers in order to attack.

### Eladrin Windwalker

Some eladrin indiscriminately blame all people of the natural world for the fate
of their homeland, and feel such overwhelming hatred towards them that they
offer themselves in ritual sacrifice. This causes their life essence to slowly
leak into the Feywild and be replaced with the raw magic of that plane. This
gives them great power for as long as their diminishing life lasts. They use
their remaining time to go out into the world and slay every humanoid they see.

Windwalkers are Level 8 Lurkers with 69 HP. They fight with **sabers** and
**blowguns** that ignore armor and target Reflex. Their damage is average, but
**Unseen Advantage** lets the windwalker deal extra damage against targets that
can't see it, and slow them for a turn on any hit.

The **Between the Winds** trait lets a windwalker become invisible and gain
phasing whenever it either spends a turn without attacking or uses its _fey
step_. These conditions last for a turn or until the windwalker attacks. This
does mean they can stay continuously invisible if they don't attack.

Windwalkers will usually try to attack every other turn like most lurkers to
benefit from Unseen Advantage, but the presence of an ally who can make them
invisible or blind PCs (like a Mirage Adept) can let them strike every turn with
bonus damage.

### Eladrin Windwalker Mirage

Windwalkers in the final stages of the process are little more than ghosts. They
become Level 8 Minion Lurkers with a ground speed of _zero_, a flight speed of 6
(hover, altitude limit 2), always-on phasing, and Resist 10 All. Despite
appearances they are _not_ undead, and are not especially vulnerable to radiant
damage and anti-undead powers.

Their **Wisp on the Wind** trait gives them partial concealment vs. enemies that
are 2 or 3 squares away, and total concealment against enemies 4 or more squares
away. Their melee attack is a **Razor Wind** that does minion-tier damage. When
they hit 0 HP, their **Dispersing Essence** attacks a Close Burst 3 and does the
same damage as Razor Wind to those it hits.

The mirage's damage resistance means you can only get it to that point by
dealing 11 or more damage with a single attack - they'll resist anything
weaker. On the bright side, this means Dispersing Essence cannot provoke a chain
reaction as it only deals 8 damage.

Mirages love large battle maps that let them invisibly fly past the party's
defenders and gang up on isolated squishies. PCs can counter this tactic by
sticking together, but Dispersing Essence makes that decision a bit tougher than
it would seem at first. Cruel GMs can make it even harder by including other
monsters capable of area attacks in the encounter.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

The Windwalker variants are evil, having succumbed to genocidal rage, but
everyone else is unaligned. And they're all super tragic.

I don't think windwalkers would mix with other eladrin, though it's easy
enough to reskin a standard Mirage Adept as another windwalker variant if you
want to mix them up. As noted above, this makes for a potent combination.
