---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Dead Rat Deserter"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Luskan is a coastal city a ways north of Neverwinter. In the games, it was a
pirate and thief-infested cesspool secretly ruled by a cabal of evil
wizards. The evil wizards were defeated in a novel before the start of the
events in this book, so now it's just exactly what it always appeared to be.

The Dead Rats are currently the most successful thieves' guild in Luskan. They
have this name because their senior members are wererats, and their initiation
ceremony involves a ritual that imparts some wererat powers to the
initiate. Their leader is a halfling bard named Toytere, also known as "King
Toy", who seems to have the power to see the future and uses it to foil the many
assassination attempts made on him.

A PC with this background used to be an average member of the Rats until they
were brought in before King Toy, who proclaimed the PC was destined to lead a
mutiny against him and ordered their execution. This was news to the PC, who
barely made it out of the room alive and managed to abscond to Neverwinter.

Their original goal here was to build enough wealth and power to return to
Luskan and take revenge on those who wronged them, but this might have changed
by the time the campaign starts.

Dead Rat Deserter PCs are usually shifty and shady types, though they're loyal
to their friends (who include the other PCs). While rogues are the first to come
to mind, there aren't any class restrictions. Characters should be either
humans, half-elves, or halflings, since those are the majority ancestries in
Luskan and make up all of the Dead Rat membership.

The background skills for this theme are Intimidate, Stealth, and Thievery.

## Features

You don't need a theme just to make a shifty character with a shady criminal
past, so why choose this one? Because it also lets you be a _wererat_!

The level 1 feature is **Body of the Rat**, an 1/round minor-action at-will
power that lets the PC assume the form of a Tiny rat. The same power also lets
them change back, and whenever they change shape they can also shift 1
square. In rat form, the PC can't attack but gains a climb speed equal to half
their ground speed and a +4 to Stealth checks. The PC's equipment melds into the
rat form, and continues to receive all of its passive benefits. There are a few
exceptions: they don't get AC bonuses from shields, can't use active item
powers, and can't access any containers (like bags or potion vials). On the
other hand, their equipment can't be removed in any way while it's part of the
rat form.

At level 5, the PC gains a +2 power bonus to Stealth and Bluff. This is useful
for a rogue-type, but would be much better if it was untyped.

At Level 10, **Hybrid Bite** lets the PC assume the classic hybrid wererat
form. Changing back and forth is an at-will minor action, like above, and the
character retains all their equipment and can use it normally. The hybrid form
has the same size as the character. The character also gains a bite attack. The
attack bonus for this is (STR or DEX modifier)+4, and the damage is 1d8+(same
modifier) plus 5 ongoing damage (save ends). The bonus increases to +6 and the
damage to 2d8 at level 21.

This attack is a little underwhelming, I think. If Strength or Dexterity is your
main attack stat, it's going to be about on par with a +2 weapon with a +2
proficiency bonus, which means it's less accurate than the characters's actual
main weapon if any of those stats are better on it. Ongoing damage on an at-will
is good, but also maybe not as good as the bonuses and powers of your main
weapon. If you use anything other than STR or DEX to attack, this power is
useless.

## Utility Powers

The optional powers here are all about tapping into your inner rat.

**Savage Hiss** is a level 2 encounter power that helps intimidate enemies in a
fight. When the PC scores a critical hit, they can use this power to inflict
every enemy within 5 squares with a -4 penalty to attack the PC for a turn.

**Dead Rat Stealth** is a level 6 daily power that takes a minor action and
gives the PC a +2 power bonus to Stealth and Thievery for the rest of the
encounter. If the PC dislikes a roll for one of these skills, they can end the
effect and reroll it with a +5 power bonus.

**Intuitive Leap** is a Level 10 daily power that represents the PC inheriting
some of King Toy's prophetic abilities. The PC can use it when it's time to roll
initiative, gaining a +4 power bonus to the roll and being able to stand up or
move their speed for free at that point.

## Impressions

Mechanically, this theme suits high-Dex characters the best, since it boosts
Stealth and Thievery and might let a character who lacks both to get access to
one of them. Being able to turn into a normal-looking rat can enable _all sorts_
of shenanigans, especially out of combat, but the hybrid form and bite attack
are of dubious utility at best. This is not a theme that will do a lot to boost
your damage output.

Story-wise, I haven't gotten far enough into the book to see whether Luskan and
the Rats influence Neverwinter in any significant way. It's possible a Rat would
just be along for the ride if they're the only one in the party. An _all-Rat_
party would result in a significantly different path than those implied by the
other paths we saw so far. They all got set up together and would still retain
their goal of getting rich and powerful enough to return and get some revenge,
likely causing a lot of chaos in Neverwinter in the process.
