---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Vault 2: Neogi"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I believe the Neogi first appeared as an element of 2e's Spelljammer setting. In
4e, they make their debut here in the MM2.

## The Lore

Neogi are bizarre-looking spider-centipede people who originally hail from the
Far Realm. Their culture is a particularly cruel and pitiless variety of
imperialist capitalism. Ownership is all - the strong rule and own the
weak. They organize themselves in clans with slavery-based internal
hierarchies. A given neogi literally owns their immediate underlings and is in
turn a slave to its immediate superior. This goes up all the way to the Great
Old Master of the clan, who is no one's slave. Neogi are a single-gendered
species without any concept of family. All of the clan's eggs are carried and
gestated by the Great Old Master.

Neogi are renowned both as traders and slavers, following the same school of
commerce made famous during Earth's Age of "Discovery". If the other party is
weaker than you, rob and enslave them. If they're equivalent or stronger,
negotiate and trade. They just love trading with similarly unsavory people like
devils, duergar, and drow. The only ones they avoid are the mind flayers, since
the entire neogi people was once enslaved by entities similar to flayers back in
the Far Realm.

For some reason, the MM2 doesn't mention any of their nautical proclivities. I
guess this part of the Astral Sea wasn't quite as fixed in the authors' minds
back them. But since later descriptions would reveal you can pretty much
transplant all of Spelljammer directly into the Astral Sea, you can bet you have
Neogi trade/slave/warships roaming that plane.

## The Numbers

Neogi are Aberrant Magical Beasts. Most are Medium, but Masters are Large. Their
levels cover the first half of Paragon Tier, making them appropriate encounters
for the Underdark or Astral Sea. Like all monsters, their level can be adjusted
if you want to feature them earlier or later. They usually have climb speeds and
darkvision, and a degree of telepathy. They also speak Common and Deep
Speech.

All Neogi are immune to the Dazed condition. Their attacks are usually some sort
of psychic power, though the exact effects vary per stat block.

### Neogi Slaver

A relatively "typical" individual, likely found as crew in an astral vessel or
as troops in raiding party. In either case, they're likely to be accompanied by
plenty of non-neogi slaves. These are some of the few monsters in the book who
would make use of the "non-lethal takedown" rule, where you can decide someone
you took to 0 HP is not dead, just unconscious. After all, dead slaves are worth
nothing.

Slavers are Level 10 Controllers with the Leader keyword and 106 HP. They have a
ground speed of 8 and a climb speed of 6 with Spider Climb. Their basic melee
attack is a weak **bite** with an ongoing poison damage rider. The first failed
save against this poison also slows the victim (save ends both).

Their main ranged attack is a **Charm Bolt** that targets Will. Instead of
dealing damage, it inflicts a -2 penalty on any attacks that don't include the
slaver as a target (save ends). After the first failed save, the slaver
also becomes invisible to the target of the bolt!

Their other attack is **Psychic Shackle** (Recharge 5+), a Close Blast 3 that
targets Will, deals psychic damage, and dazes those it hits for a turn.

Once per encounter, they can also use **Thrall Goad** as a minor action. This
allows all allies within 6 squares of the slaver to make a saving thrown with a
+5 bonus.

### Neogi Spawn Swarm

Neogi larvae are tiny and sub-sapient. Their only desire is to eat all nearby
available meat, living or not. They can be dangerous in large numbers, which is
what this stat block represents.

The Swarm counts as a Medium Level 10 Brute with 131 HP. They have the standard
swarm resistance to melee and ranged attacks, and a vulnerability to close and
area attacks. Their ground and climb speeds are both 6.

Their Swarm Attack aura (1) deals automatic poison damage, and their **bites**
are similar to that of the neogi slaver but deal more damage. When first
bloodied or when slain, the swarm lets out a collective **psychic scream** that
attacls a close burst 1 and deals psychic damage with a Daze rider.

### Neogi Great Old Master

These Large individuals rule over entire clans, and carry all of the clan's eggs
and larval broods in their immense abdomens. They're Level 16 Controllers with
157 HP, a ground speed of 6, and a climb speed of 4.

Their basic attack is a Reach 3 **Scythe Claw** that damages targets and knocks
them prone. Their main ranged attack is an **Enslaving Bolt** that targets Will,
deals psychic damage and inflicts one of those progressively worsening
conditions. The immediate effect is that the target gets a -2 penalty to any
attacks that target the Master; after the first failed save, that worsens to a
Dominate effect; and after the second the domination lasts until the target's
next extended rest. Yes, this does mean that an unlucky PC could find themselves
trying to avenge the Master even after it's been killed by the party.

When the Master is first bloodied, its abdomen ruptures and releases a Larva
Burst. This works as a Close Burst 2 against Reflex that deals physical damage
and creates a zone of difficult terrain that lasts until the end of the
encounter. This could also be a good opportunity to introduce a Spawn Swarm to
the fight if the GM is feeling sadistic.

Finally, they can use a version of the Slaver's Psychic Shackle that deals more
damage and has a wider area.
