---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Gnoll"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-gnoll.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Oh boy, more gnolls. They've been in every Monster Manual for this edition. I
skipped the MM2 entry because it turned out to fully overlap the Monster Vault,
but the one in this book is specifically meant to complement the MV instead of
overlapping with it. We don't get much in the way of new lore, but we get a few
new stat blocks.

## The Monsters

As usual, gnolls are Medium Natural Humanoids. They have low-light vision and
their ground speed is 7. Their signature ability remains **Pack Attack**,
giving them a +5 damage bonus on melee and ranged attacks against an enemy that
has two or more gnoll allies adjacent to it.

### Gnoll Skulker

Our first gnoll, however, is a bit of an exception. These runty buggers are too
cowardly to employ the usual brutish gnoll tactics, so they usually keep to the
edges of the fight and wait for opportunities to strike isolated enemies from
surprise. They're good at this, but it's not a fighting style that's valued in
"mainstream" demon-worshipping gnoll society.

Skulkers are Level 5 Lurkers with 51 HP. Their **Peerless Camouflage** allows
them to make Stealth checks to hide even when they only have partial cover or
concealment, and to stay hidden for an additional turn after leaving
cover. They lack Pack Attack but have **Something to Prove**, gaining a +5
damage bonus against enemies that have _no_ allies adjacent to them.

They fight with a **dagger** and a **shortbow**, and have a **Hit and Run**
maneuver that allows them to shift 2 squares after hitting with the bow if they
attack from hiding.

A band of gnolls with some skulkers in it is a lot harder to fight. If you
spread out a bit to make it harder for the standard gnolls to use Pack Attack,
the skulkers get you with Something to Prove, and vice-versa.

### Gnoll War Fang

War Fangs are heavily armored commander-types that also make use of demonic
powers. They're anti-paladins of Yeenoghu, basically. War Fangs are Level 6
Soldiers with 72 HP and the Leader tag.

Their **War Fang Defense** aura (1) grants allies a +2 bonus to AC, and they
fight with a Longsword that deals extra damage when they're bloodied (this
stacks with Pack Attack).

Once per round as a minor action, they can issue a **Demonic Challenge** that
works a lot like the paladin version - it marks an enemy within 3 squares, and
whenever the marked enemy makes an attack that doesn't target the war fang they
suffer 10 fire damage.

If any enemy misses the war fang with a melee attack, the **No Mercy** ability
allows an ally adjacent to that enemy to make a melee basic attack against them.

War Fangs work very well when positioned in the second row of the enemy front
line, because they'll improve the front-liners' defenses and mark the PCs from a
place where they can't be easily attacked. They also do very well on the front
line when surrounded by their allies.

### Chosen of Yeenoghu

This is a gnoll necromancer, a Level 7 Elite Controller with 156 HP. It fights
with a **staff** in melee and fires **bolts of ruination** that deal necrotic
damage at range, but its main schtick is filling the battlefield with ghostly
hyenas.

The Chosen can summon a single **Hyena Spirit** as a minor action, or four of
them at once with the **Call Beyond the Grave** encounter power. **Spirit
Strike** is a 1/round minor action that allows a spirit to make a free basic
attack with a +2 bonus. Finally, **To the Front** is a power that teleports
every adjacent ally 10 squares.

This is a monster, not a PC, so it doesn't use PC summoning rules. Hyena Spirits
are Level 7 Minion Soldiers and each one has their own full set of actions in
the initiative order. They have a **Spectral Jaws** aura (1) that slows enemies
caught inside, and a standard basic bite attack. When one of them dies, the
Chosen takes 5 damage. Depending on how the Chosen is positioned, killing the
hyenas might be the only way the PCs can damage it.

The spirits are worth 0 XP if they're summoned by a Chosen, but you can include
them in a fight by themselves and have them work as normal minions.

## Final Impressions

I continue to mourn the fact that they never expanded playable non-evil gnolls
beyond that single Dragon article, while remarking that the mechanics for these
gnolls are pretty interesting.
