---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Netherese Encounters"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

The encounter table for the Netherese is packed with shadow-themed
opponents. There are a few humans here and there, but also a lot of shadar-kai,
and Dark Ones, and a few new options to turn any of these into Shades. Since
they're a magic-heavy faction the table also includes a few constructs and bound
incorporeal undead.

## Shades

Shades are creatures that absorbed so much of the Shadowfell's ambient magic
that they mutated. They can also be born from otherwise "mundane" creatures who
absorbed that energy. As you might expect a lot of the Shadovar fit this
description.

There are two ways to turn a monster stat block into a Shade. The Forgotten
Realms' campaign setting has a monster template that turns a regular monster
into an elite shade. And this book presents a theme that adds appropriate powers
to an existing creature without upgrading its "quality".

The theme changes the base creature's origin to Shadow, adds Darkvision and
Vulnerable 5 radiant and also these three abilities:

- **Regeneration** 5, which shuts down for a turn when the creature takes
  radiant damage.

- **Coalescing Darkness**, a trait that gives the shade total concealment for a
  turn whenever it moves 3 or more squares by any means.

- **Shadow Stride**, an encounter power that takes a move action and lets the
  shade teleport up to _20_ squares, but requires that the destination space be
  in dim light or darkness.

## Thaalud Constructor

One of the most fearsome security measures in Netherese tombs and ruins are the
constructs known as Thaalud Tomb Trappers. The Constructor is a modern design
based on those, weaker but easier to make.

That's all the lore we get for this monsters. Since I don't know anything about
tomb trappers I'm forced to speculate based on their stat. I'm thinking they're
huge eyeless humanoid statues, and quite a bit smarter than your typical
mindless construct.

A constructor is a Huge Natural Animate with the Blind and Construct keywords,
and a Level 5 Elite Brute with 154 HP. It's immune to poison, blindness, and
gaze attacks, and has Resist 5 to cold, fire, and lightning. It perceives the
world with Blindsight 20.

It attacks with **Mauling Fists** that damage and grab on a hit (escape DC 15),
and can make **double attacks** with them. If the constructor has a Large or
smaller creature grabbed, it can throw it at someone else with **Hurl Foe**, a
ranged attack that damages both the target and the "ammunition". On a hit, the
target is pushed 1 square and knocked prone, and the hurled PC falls prone on
the target's former space. On a miss both take half damage and the thrown
character falls prone adjacent to the target.

When a constructor is destroyed it **Collapses into rubble**, attacking a Close
Burst 1 around itself and turning that area into a zone of difficult terrain
that lasts until the end of the encounter. Note that the creature is Huge, so
this zone is 4 squares on a side.

## Clariburnus Tanthul, Prince of Shade

The Shadovar are ruled by the Twelve Princes of Shade, Netherese mages who were
witnesses to the fall of their empire and managed to stay alive(-ish) to the
present day. Clariburnus Tanthul is one of these Twelve.

Contrary to all expectations, he's not undead! Tanthul is an ancient living
shade, and is described as retaining more of his original humanity than the
other Princes. Still, he's a merciless manipulator with no concept of honor,
breaking his promises as casually as he breathes.

Clariburnus Tanthul is a Medium Shadow Humanoid and a Level 10 Elite Skirmisher
with 158 HP. He has a Speed of 7 and both Blindsight 10 and Darkvision. His
traits resemble those of the Shade theme above but they're custom and more
powerful.

His **Benighted Presence** acts as an aura (5) that turns bright light dim, and
his **Regeneration** heals 15 HP per turn, though it's still shut down for a
turn by radiant damage.

He wields a scimitar named **Gloom Crescent**, which can make basic attacks and
is also used for the **Severing Shadows** technique. This lets him make 2 basic
attacks (3 if bloodied), teleporting 5 squares before each one. If he hits the
same target twice that target also takes 5 ongoing force damage (save
ends). This worsens to 10 ongoing force damage and blindness after the first
failed save (save ends both).

Once per encounter he can use a ranged spell named **By Night Consumed**, which
deals necrotic damage and _removes the target from play_ (save ends). A miss
deals half damage and dazes (save ends). Nasty!

His **Shadow Stride** lets him teleport 5 squares regardless of light
conditions, which increases to 10 if the destination is in darkness. It's also a
(Recharge 4+) ability instead of an encounter power, so he can use it more than
once in a fight.

## Impressions

This has less custom stat blocks than some of the other factions, so you'll be
mostly relying on the encounter table and shade versions of natural
critters. Still, the custom stat blocks we do get are fun, and it looks like
Clariburnus is a genuine Forgotten Realms big shot who would normally get an
epic-level stat block. This book does deliver on its promise of giving the PCs
the chance to have an impact in the world during Heroic tier.
