---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Shark"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-shark.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Illustration by Jim Nelson. Copyright 2009 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Sharks are are real-world animals, and this Monster Manual 2 entry is their
debut on D&D Fourth Edition. The [Sahuagin][2] entry from the first Monster
Manual mentioned them a lot but that book didn't have shark stats. The Monster
Vault did have them, and we already looked at its take on sharks in the post
linked above.

There are many species of real-world sharks, with very varied looks and
behavior. Rather than worry about any of that, the Monster Manual 2 gives us a
fantastic species based on our worst fears about sharks. Witness the horrible
might of the Fleshtearer Shark, the bullete of the sea!

## The Lore

Fleshtearer sharks seem to be kinda modeled on the shark from Jaws. They're big,
they're stupid, they'll try to eat anything they can bite, and that can include
boats. These sharks can thrive anywhere, I do mean anywhere: not only can you
find them in oceans of any temperature, they sometimes live in rivers and lakes
and even swim in the Underdark.

Fleshtearers can live for hundreds of years and never stop growing, which can
make those subterranean sharks even larger and stronger than the typical
specimen presented in this entry.

Sahuagin and kuo-toa usually steer clear of fleshtearer sharks because they're
too dangerous to tame, but sometimes a heroic trained among them will manage the
feat. In this case, the "tame" flesh-tearer is used in raids against large
ships, eating anyone who falls overboard and biting holes in the hull.

## The Numbers

Fleshtearer sharks are Large Natural Beasts with the Aquatic keyword. They're
Level 10 Brutes with 128 HP and low-light vision. They swim at speed 8, but can
only flop around at speed 1 on land.

The Aquatic keyword gives the shark a +2 attack bonus against non-aquatic
opponents when both are in water, and it also has a custom **Waterborne** trait
that stacks a +2 damage bonus on top of that.

Their basic attack is of course a **Bite**, but they also have several special
maneuvers. **Lockjaw Charge** is a charge attack that also grabs the
target. Grabbed targets are vulnerable to the shark's **shredding teeth**, which
always hit and deal heavy damage.

The shark has no special ability to pull a grabbed victim along when it moves,
so it must use the standard rules for doing that (opposed Strength tests). It
can also choose to stay in place while it chews into the victim with Shredding
Teeth.

A fleshtearer shark will lurk out of detection range until it picks a target
(the tastiest-looking PC). It will then use Lockjaw charge on them, relying on
its toughness to weather any opportunity attacks. It will probably release the
grab and swim away for another pass rather than getting pinned down by the other
PCs, but it's too obstinate to run and usually fights to the death.

The shark's bloodlust often gets in the way of those tactics, which is
represented by a trait named **Feeding Frenzy**. When the shark starts its turn
within 5 squares of a bloodied creature, it must make a bite attack against a
creature adjacent to itself, which will also make it release a grabbed victim if
it has one. "Creature" here means both allies and enemies can trigger the effect
and be valid targets for the bite attack. Even a "tame" shark is dangerous to
its allies.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

It's a movie shark, doing movie shark things. If you're adventuring on or under
water, you might run into it, otherwise it won't usually impact your adventuring
life.

You can make them Huge and level them up to represent Underdark sharks, in which
case they might make good thralls for Aboleths and for Mind Flayers who want to
fight Aboleths.

We get one sample encounter here:

- Level 10: 2 fleshtearer sharks, 1 sahuagin baron, 2 sahuagin priests. This is
  likely the "command squad" for a bigger raid against a large ship or coastal
  village. They'd stay a bit further away from the front lines, and engaging
  them might be necessary to end the raid.

[2]: {{ "/2020/11/11/sahuagin.html" | relative_url }}
