---
layout: post
title: 'Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Imix, Part 2"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

In this post we'll take a look at the kind of people who make up Imix's cult in
the middle world. As mentioned in [Part 1][2], the cult promises to give its
adherents the power to burn all that angers them, so it draws in all sorts of
misanthropes, murderers, and people with all-consuming grudges. Rising through
the cult's ranks means allowing your free will to be burned out piece by
piece. No matter your reasons for joining, soon all you'll care about is serving
your primordial master.

Cultists of Imix can act covertly, infiltrating peaceful communities to sow
sedition and discord. They can also act more openly, establishing strongholds
and calling out to both recruits and mercenaries to help conquer the surrounding
regions, immolating anyone who opposes them.

The cultist lineup here is pretty diverse, species-wise, for the Fire Lord isn't
picky like those posers Yeenoghu and Baphomet. He'll find a use for anyone
willing to swear the oaths, even if that use is "walking bomb". These stat
blocks should be mixed with more "generic" stat blocks for humans and other
humanoid or elemental opposition to build Imix-themed encounter groups. They're
not enough to do so on their own.

## Fire Lord Cultist

This Level 5 Minion Brute represents the bulk of the cult's low-ranking
followers. They have a speed of 6 and fight with torches and **clubs**. Their
melee attacks deal extra damage if they're adjacent to an ally, so they have an
incentive to cluster around a PC.

They can also use that torch in the **Ignite** ability. This encounter power is
a melee attack that targets Reflex and deals ongoing 5 fire damage (save
ends). Make sure this is their first attack, because they might not get a chance
to use it otherwise.

## Servant of the Fire Lord

A more senior and better-trained cultist. Servants of the Fire Lord tend to hide
out in sapient communities disguised as clerics of more benign deities. They use
this cover to undermine the community and spread Imix's influence over it.

The Servant stat block depicts a half-elf. It's a Level 6 Skirmisher with the
Leader tag and 73 HP. Their ground speed is 6 and they have low-light vision.

Servants try to always keep moving in order to benefit from their **Wildfire
Stride** passive trait: if they move at least 3 squares, their attacks deal +5
fire damage for a turn.

They wield **scimitars** that can perform a standard basic attack and an
**Immolating Strike**, which is a bit weaker but deals ongoing 5 fire damage
(save ends). The basic strike itself is also kinda weak - it's the Wildfire
Stride damage bonus that brings it to the expected level of damage.

Their "leaderly" skill is the **Gift of Fire** (recharge 5+), a minor action
that gives every ally within 5 squares a +5 fire damage bonus that lasts for a
turn.

## Fire Temple Elect

The name sounds important, but that's a lie. Fire Temple Elects are cultists who
had all of their will burned away but didn't have the potential to master Imix's
mysteries. They proudly serve their master as walking bombs.

Elects are Level 7 Minion Skirmishers with an excellent ground speed of 7. They
employ human wave tactics, charging enemies with their **shortwswords**. When an
elect drops to 0 HP, they trigger the **Self-Immolation** ability. When this
happens the elect can move its speed as a free action, and then explode. This is
a Close Burst 1 attack that targets Reflex and deals a bit of fire damage. It's
not selective, so if you have a bunch of elects close together the first one to
get hit might trigger a chain reaction.

## Fire Temple Champion

This one's actually important. Champions also have little of their free will
left, but unlike the Elects they were tough enough to handle a more substantial
blessing. They're tasked with protecting key locations and important
individuals. I can also see them leading mercenary squads in operations
important to the cult.

The stat block in the book is for a dragonborn Champion, a Level 8 Soldier with
88 HP. She wears plate and wields a Fullblade (a big two-handed sword).

The Champion has the same **Wildfire Stride** ability seen in the Servant of the
Fire Lord, above. Her **fullblade** attacks mark for a turn, and do damage
that's only a couple of points below the expected average - Wildfire Stride
makes them stronger than that average. If a marked enemy within reach moves on
their turn, the Champion can use a **Fiery Attack** against them, dealing the
same damage as a basic attack and inflicting ongoing 5 fire damage (save ends).

If that marked enemy instead makes an attack that doesn't include the champion
as a target, she can use a **Fiery Rebuke**, a Close Blast 3 attack that targets
only the triggering enemy, attacks Reflex and deals fire damage.

And as a dragonborn, this particular champion also has one use of **Dragon
Breath** per encounter. It works like the power for Dragonborn PCs, a Close
Blast 3 that targets Reflex. It obviously deals fire damage, and marks those it
hits.

## Flameborn

Flameborn are priests who have attained sufficient rank to run a small
temple/stronghold, with the goal of making it grow larger and more
important. They're ultimately in charge of those recruitment drives and raiding
campaigns I mentioned earlier. In other words they're accomplished middle
managers.

The stat block we get is a human priest, who is Level 15 Artillery with 111 HP
and the Leader keyword. They have Speed 6 and Resist 10 Fire, the first Imix
cultists actually resistant to their thematic element. They project an aura (5)
named **Fire Within**, which grants Resist 5 Fire to all allies inside.

Flameborn with with **flails** in melee and with **fire bolts** at range. The
bolts also inflict ongoing fire damage. Once per encounter they can call down
the **Blessing of Imix**, which covers a Close Burst 3. It acts as an attack
dealing fire damage to enemies, and grands allies 10 temporary HP.

Their final power is a minor action, **Fiery Eye**, which can target targets
taking ongoing fire damage. It's a rangged attack against Will that does no
damage, slides the target 2 squares, and makes them grant combat advantage (save
ends).

Flameborn pair well with skirmishers that possess sneak-attack-like
abilities. They can also grant fire resistance to their front-line without
having to stand right behind it.
