---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Cyclops"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-couatl.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][2] to see the other entries.

This is another one of those entries that gives us more stat blocks for monsters
introduced in the first Monster Manual.

## The Lore

We already covered the bulk of cyclops lore in the corresponding [Monster Manual
post][1], so I'll going to say it's super cool and ask you to read the original
post again.

We get some specific lore for the two new variants: Cyclops Crushers are
employed as slave minders, directing their crushing towards any who step out of
line. Feyblades are pampered bodyguards who rarely engaged in manual labor, and
like to lord their superior status over their less important colleagues.

## The Numbers

The [original post][1] also contains the traits for cyclopes, but I'll summarize
them again for convenience: they're Large Fey Humanoids, trained in perception,
and have Truesight, which lets them see invisible creatures and objects. They
all also have some sort of Evil Eye ability that varies per stat block.

### Cyclops Crusher

This one appears in the Monster Vault, so it's also covered in the [original
post][1]. Its MM2 stat block is identical as far as abilities go, but suffers
from all the math bugs common at the time of publication. Go with the Monster
Vault stat block and you won't be missing anything.

### Cyclops Feyblade

The first cyclops we haven't already seen in our Let's Reads is a Level 21
Soldier with 200 HP, which means it's significantly stronger than all the other
cyclopes we've seen so far. It wears mail and fights with a longsword. Its speed
is 8. It's more or less equivalent to a simplified PC swordmage.

Despite its greater level the feyblade is actually very mechanically simple. The
**Longsword** is its most basic and best attack, doing physical damage with no
riders. The **Evil Eye** is a Ranged 20 minor action that marks a target
automatically, lasting until the end of the encounter or until the feyblade
marks someone else.

This cyclops earns its title because it knows **Wildstep**, an immediate
interrupt that triggers when the marked victim ignores the mark. The feyblade
can then teleport 10 squares to be adjacent to the victim and make an attack to
it that deals sligthly less damage than the basic sword.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

Not all cyclopes are slaves to the fomorians, but the MM2 seems to want to
emphasize their "natural" position as someone else's goons and mentions they can
also be found serving firbolg and drow. This would eventually be elaborated into
a code of honor that prevents oaths of servitude from being broken.

The sample encounter is Level 13: 2 crushers, 2 eladrin bladesingers and 1
firbolg moon seer.

Cyclopes are cool, and more of them means more choice for a fey paragon campaign
versus the Fomorians. So I like these ones.

[1]: {{ "/2019/09/03/cyclops.html" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/projects/mm2-4e/" | relative_url }}
