---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Shambling Mound"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-shambling-mound.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Shambling mounds are one of D&D's most enduring plant monsters, being present in
every edition since at least BECMI. Here, they are only on the Monster Manual,
but they got an update in Dungeon 196.

## The Lore

Animated piles of vegetable matter who roam the world's swamps and marshes,
shambling mounds are carnivores that draw prey into themselves using their
ropelike tendrils. Then they feed by boring countless tiny roots into their
trapped victim's body.

These creatures are nonsapient, but clever enough to pose as piles of mulch
until suitable prey wanders by. They're not primarily ambush predators, though -
particularly hungry shambling mounds will go on the hunt.

Shambling mounds are not only immune to electricity, but actually healed by
lightning. I imagine this was a pretty big deal in editions past for those
levels where Lightning Bolt was one of the wizard's premier attack options. It's
a bit less of a problem now, except maybe for the party's storm sorcerer.  This
also suggests the creatures like places where lightning storms are common, such
as monsoon-blasted mangroves right next to those temples guarded by nagas. Sages
speculate that the monsters are actually created when lightning hits a mass of
plant matter in such places, though they don't know what other factors might be
involved in the process.

Some shambling mound varieties have a further affinity to lightning and are able
to store it in their bodies for use in combat.

## The Numbers

Shambling mounds are Large Natural Animates with the Plant keyword. They have
Darkvision and Swamp Walk, some level of Regeneration, and are immune to
lightning damage. They also have a **Lightning Affinity** trait that heals them
for 10 HP whenever they're hit by a lightning attack.

Aside from a damage update, the stat blocks from Dungeon are identical to the
ones in the MM. We get two shambler stat blocks:

### Shambling Mound

The classic model is a Level 9 Brute with 120 HP and the standard traits
described above. Its land speed is a plodding 4, but due to Swamp Walk it won't
be hindered by difficult terrain in its native environment. They have
Regeneration 5.

It attacks with its **tendrils**, and can make an **Enveloping Double Attack**
at will. This allows it to make two basic attacks, and if both hit the same
Medium or smaller target, it makes a further attack against their Fortitude.

A hit on that one pulls the target into the shambling mound! While in there, the
victim is restrained and no other creature has line of sight or effect to it. At
the start of the mound's turns, those tiny boring roots drain the victim's
blood, dealing 10 damage and restoring 10 HP to the mound. Up to two such
victims can be caught in this way. All of this is (save ends).

A shambler with 2 victims inside heals 25 HP per turn! And since no one has line
of effect to the victim, those cleric powers that allow free saves don't work on
them - they have to roll a natural save to escape, or have access to those save
powers themselves. The Restrained condition would still allow them to attack at
a penalty, but that same "no line of effect" clause means they can't attack the
shambler.

### Stormrage Shambler

This is the one with batteries included. Stormrage Shamblers are Level 11 Elite
Controllers with 238 HP and the standard traits listed above. Their land speed
is a brisk 8, still with Swamp Walk. They have Regeneration 10.

These shamblers project a **Lightning Aura** 2 that deal lighning damage to
those enemies caught inside.

Like the basic model, they also fight with their **tendrils** and can make
**Double Attacks**, but don't have the enveloping mechanics. Instead, the
tendril attacks deal extra lightning damage when they're bloodied. They can also
fire a **Lightning Blast** once per encounter (Close Blast 3 vs. Reflex), which
obviously do a bunch of lightning damage, half on a miss.

They still have Lighning Affinity, with the added note that they can't use it to
heal themselves.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

There's one sample encounter: Level 9, 1 shambling mound, 3 assorted vine
horrors, and 2 dryads. In Soviet Nerath, salad eats you.

I like shambling mounds! Don't think I ever used one, but I should really remedy
that. The standard model is a bit more dangerous than its level implies, since
there are few ways to grant extra saves to an enveloped victim and the extra
healing they provide can make the fight last longer.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
