---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Blacklake District"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

The Blacklake district, so named because it contains an actual lake, was also
where most nobles and other wealthy citizens of Neverwinter used to live. Pretty
much all of them died in the fires of the cataclysm, but their very sturdy and
well-built residences remained standing. They sheltered many of the city's
survivors during the following decades, even though the lake became a fetid,
ash-choked pool.

Today, Blacklake is a rough-and-tumble place still largely outside of
Neverember's control. His forces have begun moving in and attempting to extend
the Enclave to the district, but so far they have not met much success. This is,
after all, where everyone who can't stand his harsh rule lives. From die-hard
holdouts to greedy muggers to hot-tempered duelist to entire secret societies,
all make a home here.

Castle Never is located in Blacklake, but it was covered in its own post.

## The Driftwood Tavern

The place where everybody knows your name. The Driftwood tavern has been open
since before the Cataclysm. Its owner, Madame Rosene, opened the tavern's doors
to shelter refugees in the event's immediate aftermath, and it became a kind of
makeshift city hall for the survivor community in the following years.

Today, the Madame is in her fifties and the tavern is filled with mementos and
relics of Neverwinter That Was, making it a sort of museum. Both the place's
somber atmosphere and its high prices keep the Mintarn mercs at bay - the only
customers are long-time regulars and old friends.x

This suits Madame Rosene just fine, because the Driftwood Tavern is also the
main headquarters of the Greycloaks faction of the Sons of Alagondar, which she
leads.

A text box says that Madame Rosene would react positively to PCs who can
recognize the historical and sentimental value of the Neverwinter relics that
decorate her tavern, and that she might test their patience and resolve by
sending them on seemingly pointless quests to recover more.

## The Beached Leviathan

This tavern is actually built out of an old pirate ship that ran aground decades
ago. Its owner Harrag was also the boat's former captain. He presents himself as
an adventuresome scallywag but the truth is Neverember owns him. Anything people
say within earshot of him eventually makes its way to the lord.

The tavern also acts as the current residence of Len-Jes, a watersoul genasi who
works as Neverember's harbormaster. Her job includes keeping track of (and
taxing) every ship at port, and also dredging the bay to open more berths for
trade ships.

Len-Jes only took this job because if facilitates her second, much shadier
source of income. The exact nature of that is up to the GM. Is she a spy for an
Abeir trade house or pirate crew? Does she have buried treasure somewhere? Does
she actually work for some other faction like the Harpers or the Ashmadai?

## Vellgard Manor

Mordai Vell's family home. They used to be a prominent Neverwinter noble family
but they all dies in the Cataclysm. Mordai Vell was the only survivor because,
as a tiefling, he was a source of shame and was sent away from town. As the sole
heir, he came back to reclaim his home shortly before Neverember arrived... and
he brought his Ashmadai buddies with him.

Vell's charisma and wealth soon secured him an informal community leadership
role in the district, and there are those who think he'd make a fine lord of the
city. I don't think he ever made overt claims to the throne, but perhaps he will
when his cult is in a strong enough position.

Vellgard Manor is very well fortified, and guarded by a small army of cultists
and summoned devils. A direct assault would be difficult... but Vell likes to
party, so the PCs might get in by arranging invitations to his latest social
function. The devils are kept hidden during these. Of course, Vell is no fool,
so he might allow the PCs to get in and spring a trap on them if they're not
very subtle in their maneuvering.

## House of a Thousand Faces

This tavern used to be a fancy boutique, and it's still decorated with
mannequins in old-fashioned clothing. It closed after the cataclysm and reopened
as a tavern when the city's population began to recover.

Its owner, the elf Theryis, is a member of the Harpers. Her brother Toram took
over as the leader of the group once Cymril died. As mentioned elsewhere, these
two are the sole remaining full Harpers in the city, and they aren't predisposed
to trust the PCs just because they're PCs. Their default stance is to watch and
test them until they prove themselves properly heroic, or until they bring
evidence of the larger factions.

Toram, however, will attack the Harper Agent on sight because he's convinced
they were responsible for Cymril's death. He was in love with her, you
see... or, as the book puts it, _she was seducing him before her supposed
death_. Make of that what you will.
