---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Xorn"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I see xorns in my copy of the AD&D 1st Edition monster manual, so they date from
at least that far back. This is their 4e debut, and they're the last monster in
the book.

## The Lore

Xorns are earth elementals native to the Elemental Chaos, but they long ago
spread to the deep subterranean tunnels and caverns of the world. Their
three-lobed radial symmetry makes them seem quite bizarre to natives of the
world.

Xorns can swim through rock and earth as if it was water, and must feed on
certain rare metals and gems. They're sapient, and will often bargain with other
people, aiding in their mining or smelting efforts in exchange for their
"food". It seems they're not very concerned with much beyond their own survival,
so they'll happily ally with creatures of all dispositions, from dwarves and
galeb dhur to duergar and fire giants.

Xorns found in the wild are likely to be drawn to the gems and magic items
carried by PCs. The PCs might be able to negotiate with them and avoid a
fight... but some less scrupulous xorns tend to use these negotiations to help
set ambushes.

## The Numbers

We get two stat blocks here, but they're very similar, so I'll discuss the first
one and then note how the second one differs from it.

### Xorn

The basic model is a Medium Elemental Magical Beast (Earth), and a Level 9
Skirmisher with 102 HP. Its senses include darkvision and all-around vision,
which prevents it from being flanked. It has a relatively low ground speed of 5,
and a burrow speed of 5 that's enhanced by the **Earth Glide** ability. It
allows the xorn to burrow through solid rock as if it was loose earth, using its
full burrow speed at all times.

The xorn's basic attack is a **Claw**, and **Triple Strike** allows it to make
three of those against different targets. If there's only one foe in range, it
will use its **Earthy Maw** instead since it does about double the damage of a
claw strike.

As a minor action, the xorn can **Submerge**, partially burying itself and
gaining a +2 bonus to AC until it moves. When it's missed by a melee attack, it
can **retreat**, burrowing its speed as a reaction.

In a fight, a xorn will jump from inside a wall or floor, submerge for the AC
bonus, and claw or bite the party's squishies. If a missed attack doesn't make
the creature retreat automatically, it will do so on its next turn so it can
repeat this pattern. Earth Glide makes it extremely mobile despite its poor
speed, particularly in an underground environment.

## Diadmondhide Xorn

This is an older or simply well-fed specimen, who lives in a place of the
Elemental Chaos where its preferred food is more plentiful. Its hide glitters
with the minerals it has ingested.

Diamondhide xorns are Large in size, and are Level 16 Skirmishers with 160
HP. They have all the same attacks and abilties as the basic xorn, with bigger
numbers. They also have a new attack named **Undermine** (recharge 5+) in which
the xorn burrows its speed and attacks a creature it passes under. This targets
Reflex, does heavy damage, and restrains the target (save ends).

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is level 9, and consists of a pair of xorns in cahoots with
a troop of duergar.

I'm happy to see xorns here. Their weird looks make them an iconic D&D monster
in my mind. A nice way to close the book.
