---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: New Neverwinter Encounters"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

New Neverwinter's hired goons can be represented by a variety of statblocks for
characters or usually-playable ancestries extracted from the Monster Manual 2,
Monster Vault, and Threats to the Nentir Vale. There's a table here with entries
ranging from level 1 to level 8. As far as the PCs are concerned, he has a
effectively limitless supply of these.

We also get detailed writeups for Neverember himself and for Soman Galt, and
some information on General Sabine, the faction's third big shot.

## Dagult Neverember

As written, Neverember is a somewhat complex villain by D&D standards. He's
ruthless, greedy, arrogant and imperialistic, but he is not evil-aligned. His
preferred way of lining his own pockets also tends to be beneficial to his trade
partners, and he is sincere in his desire to improve the lives of his subjects
even if it's only so they'll crown him king. He also behaves like a typical
mercantilist aristocrat, which includes a dose of sexism. He treats "intelligent
male acquaintances" with respect but "flirts outrageously" with "beautiful
female guests". I strongly suggests removing these traits from his personality
if you want him to come off as sympathetic to your players.

If the PCs can stomach his horrible personality, he might end up allied with
them against a greater threat, even if only because that greater threat would be
worse for the region than him.

If he dies, it will cause a lot of chaos in the city, because like it or not
he's one of the region's current stabilizing forces. The Thayans, Netherese, and
the rebels would immediately feel emboldened by the chaos, and the rebels in
particular will immediately turn on anyone who tries to take leadership of the
city for themselves (because _they_ want it). If no one else manages to take
over, General Sabine will do it and turn the city into a brutal militarized
police state. So I guess the PCs should make sure the region is set up to remain
stable after his demise before facing the guy.

Neverember is a Level 7 Soldier with 84 HP. Yes, he's a regular, which means he
will have _plenty_ of bodyguards with him. He's armed with a **Longsword** whose
basic attacks inflict a -2 penalty to hit for a turn, and if an adjacent enemy
shifts or targets someone other than him with an attack, he can use **Lord's
Rebuke** to make a free basic attack against them. He can also **Taunt**
(recharge 4+), an attack vs. Will that targets one enemy and on a hit pulls them
4 squares and makes them grant combat advantage for a turn.

## General Sabine

General Sabine doesn't get a section of her own, but I'm collecting and
repeating the scattered information we get about her here. She's the commander
of the mercenary company Lord Neverember hired to act as his army and police
force.

The reason he's using mercenaries is because using his house troops from
Waterdeep would make the whole situation look too much like an invasion and
occupation by a foreign power. Sabine, however, is perfectly able and willing to
command her army like the foreign invasion and occupation force it is. There's
not to much nuance to her character - she's an uncomplicated brutal
authoritarian. She uses the stats for the Human Cavalier from the MM2, making
her a Level 8 Soldier.

I imagine there are lots of complaints about the police brutality inflicted on
the citizenry of Neverwinter by the mercenaries, and I also imagine they have
not yet reached a level that will make Neverember care about them. If Neverember
dies suddenly, General Sabine is the most likely character to replace him in the
power struggle that will follow, and things will get a lot more brutal and
authoritarian when that happens.

Mordai Vell, one of the leaders of the Ashmadai, is trying to recruit Sabine for
the cult. As of the campaign's start, he hasn't succeeded yet - whether he will
or not depends on the wishes of the GM and the events that happen in play.

## Soman Galt

The acting mayor of Neverwinter gained his position because of his previous
career as a government official. He's more than a bit scatterbrained but is
capable of taking his job seriously and performing it competently.

Neverember thinks of Galt as a useful puppet, and he's right. However, he's
_someone else's_ puppet. Rohini, the Prophet of Helm's Hold, got a hold of the
dwarf and turned him into an asset of the Abolethic Sovereignity quite some time
ago. As the campaign starts, Galt is under an incredible number of
aboleth-crafted post-hypnotic suggestions, and regularly visits Helm's Hold to
receive more. This has him looking less and less healthy as time goes by.

It also means the aboleths are effectively in control of the city's civil and
social policies, and know everything that happens on it. They know which spots
on the city wall are less defended, and send their monsters there. They're going
to have an incredible edge when they decide to really invade the surface.

Galt _doesn't actually know_ any of this, and would probably go insane from
trauma and guilt if he learned it. In emergencies, one of the aboleths below can
assume direct control of him, switching his alignment from Unaligned to Chaotic
Evil and giving him access to extra powers. Once he becomes bloodied, that
control becomes stronger and he begins moving as if he was having a seizure.

Galt is a Level 6 Controller with 74 HP. His typical dwarven speed of 5
increases to 7 when he's bloodied. Being bloodied also activates his aura (5) of
**Dissonant Gibberish**, which inflicts Vulnerable 5 Psychic and a -2 penalty to
saves on all enemies inside.

Galt's basic attack is a **Whipping Warhammer** that damages and slides the
target 1 square. He can **Transmute the Unwilling** as a ranged attack, dealing
psychic damage and slowing (save ends). Even on a miss this still slows for a
turn. Once per encounter he can **Weave Nightmares** in a Close Burst 2,
targeting all enemies, dealing heavy psychic damage and dazing (save ends). Also
once per encounter he can **Twist Space** to teleport 3 squares. If he chooses
to appear in an enemy's space with this, they swap positions and the enemy
grants combat advantage for a turn.
