---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Trolls"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

In a situation that has been common in this reading, we're in a halfway place
when it comes to trolls. The Monster Manual marks their debut in this edition,
and the Monster Vault gives us a final selection of updated stat blocks. Here in
the Monster Manual 2, published between those two books, we have a selection of
trolls that expands the options from the MM, but is not yet updated for the MV's
math.

## Ice Troll

It's unclear from the text whether ice trolls are a variant troll species or
just a variant culture. They inhabit the Frostfell, one of the world's coldest
regions, but occasionally make their way to slightly warmer climates. Ice trolls
have a more complex and technically advanced culture than that of "typical"
trolls. They know how to make weapons, and prefer to use them in combat instead
of their claws. They also emanate a cold aura.

If you want to portray your trolls less universally hostile, ice troll
communities could make good trading partners in cold regions, trading their
weapons and crafts for other products they need. Ice troll mercenaries might
also be found among the forces of anyone who sets up shop in the frozen regions
of your campaign world.

### The Numbers

Ice trolls are Large Natural Humanoids and Level 10 Soldiers with 109 HP. Their
**Emanating Cold** aura (1) slows any enemies caught inside for a turn. They
have a ground speed of 8.

Ice troll regeneration works exactly like that of standard trolls: Regeneration
10 plus Troll Healing that allows them to keep regaining HP after
hitting 0. Both are shut down for a turn if the troll takes acid or fire damage.

This troll wears scale armor and fights with a **maul**. If their maul attack
bloodies an enemy, **Frenzied Strike** allows them to make another free
attack. This _could_ lead to a big chain combo if the ice troll manages to hit
several near-bloodied PCs, but most likely you'll be looking at one extra attack
when this triggers.

Weapon use would make ice trolls a lot more dangerous than standard ones in a
"realistic" system like GURPS, but here it's mostly for color since damage is
entirely level-based. It does allow you to place magic weapons and armor as
treasure by saying the troll was using them.

## Bladerager Troll

This troll was updated for the Monster Vault, so we already saw its numbers on
the [MM/MV reading][2]. A new bit of lore in this entry says that some of the
weapons and armor implanted on a bladerager are magic, which gives GMs an excuse
to place magic items as treasure in bladerager encounters. This makes them the
only monster in the game to have literal loot drops.

## Troll Vinespeaker

Here's something you don't see every day: a troll spellcaster with genius-level
intellect! You go, vinespeaker! Break those stereotypes! Unfortunately the
vinespeaker doesn't break _every_ troll stereotype, so it's still Chaotic
Evil. You'll have to break that one yourself if your campaign calls for it.

Vinespeakers use a style of primal nature magic that involves wrapping
themselves in thorny vines and letting their blood soak the plants to gain
control over them. This would be lethal for any other practitioner, but for a
troll it's no trouble at all. With their magic power and high intelligence,
vinespeakers tend to become leaders or revered advisors of larger troll
communities.

### The Numbers

Vinespeakers are Level 14 Controllers with 142 HP. They have Regeneration 10,
Troll Healing, and the usual vulnerabilities, as well as the usual Speed 8.

They can use their **claws** to fight like a typical troll, but their vines give
them many more options. They have a ranged attack named **Ray of Thorns** that
deals physical damage, and an area burst attack named **Thorny Burst** that
deals light physical damage and immobilizes (save ends). This also creates a
zone of thorny difficult terrain that deals damage to those caught inside, and
lasts until the end of the encounter. If any of these attacks bloodies a target,
the vinespeaker gets to make a free claw attack. No target is specified, so any
PC within reach will do fine.

Note: Thorny Burst is at-will. Vinespeakers can turn the entire battlefield into
a spiky mess in no time at all. A good tactic for the is to spam this attack
until there's no more ground to cover or until the PCs are all immobilized, then
target the most vulnerable foes with the single-target Ray.

Finally, they have an encounter ability named **Chant of Power**, which gives
allies in within 5 squares 10 temporary HP and a +4 damage bonus while the
temporary HP lasts. This works wonderfully as either a fight opener or a
mid-fight boost.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

I like these MM2 trolls, they do a good job of subverting the troll stereotype.

We get three encounters:

- Level 10: 2 ice trolls, 2 worgs, and 1 manticore. Lots of raw melee power in
  this one, with a maneuverable skirmisher thrown in.

- Level 12: 3 bladeragers, 1 duergar blasphemer, 1 duergar hellcaller. Duergar
  diabolists are exactly the sort of person who'd make bladerager trolls.

- Level 15: 4 war trolls, 1 destrachan far voice, 1 vinespeaker. The war trolls
  can more or less ignore the thorns. They'll be slowed by the difficult
  terrain, but so will everyone else. The destrachan offers some artillery
  support and can stay far away from the thorn zones.

[2]:  {{ "/2021/01/09/troll.html" | relative_url }}
