---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Demons, Part 2"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Continuing with the "Demon" entry of the Monster Manual 2, let's look at a few
more abyssal greeblies.

## Gnaw Demon

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-demon-gnaw.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These round boys live to eat. Their hunger is insatiable and they're always
gnawing on and eating everything around them. That sentence is quite literal
too: they can eat _anything_, so they eat _everything_, all the time. Being
demons, of course, they prefer living flesh above all else.

Despite this, gnaw demons are also quite cowardly and will run away if they see
they've bitten off more than they can chew. Tracking them down isn't too
difficult, though, since they'll soon become distracted by some other
weak-looking target.

Gnaw demons can teleport, but it's apparently a reflex not under their conscious
control. Though they'll likely avoid the thick of the fight at first, the smell
of blood drives them into a frenzy.

### The Numbers

Gnaw Demons are Small Elemental Humanoids, and Level 5 Skirmishers with 66
HP. They have Darkvision and are slow and blobby with a ground speed of 3 and a
flight speed of 5 (clumsy). They have Variable Resistance 10 (1/encounter).

In combat they're all about biting, since they're pretty much trying to eat
you. Their **Ankle Biter** aura (1) inflicts a -2 penalty to the speed of any
enemy caught inside. Their basic attack is the obvious **bite**, which deals
extra damage to bloodied enemies.

That reflexive teleport is modeled with two different abilities: **Hungry
Teleport** (move action) allows the demon to teleport 10 squares into a square
adjacent to a bloodied enemy. **Pain-Induced Teleport** (free action when first
bloodied) is an unrestricted 10-square teleport, which it will likely use to
flee.

### Impressions

I kinda like these critters. They're more flavorful than evistros (which
smoulder with generic rage), though they also pair really well with them or
other front-liners that can get the enemy bloodied so they can teleport in.

The sample encounter is Level 6 and has three of these spherical terrors
accompanying a pair of gnolls.

## Kazrith

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-demon-kazrith.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Kazriths are barracuda-like aquatic demons that prowl the watery bodies of the
abyss and might be summoned to do so elsewhere. Despite their preference for
water they're also perfectly capable of operating on land, so you don't have to
build an underwater dungeon in order to use them.

Though sapient, kazriths prefer to act as ambush predators, burying themselves
in the ground and jumping out to attack anything that looks like it would be fun
to kill. Their pores secrete strong acid, which helps both with the burrowing
and with the killing.

They burrow as fast as they can run and leave stable tunnels behind, which means
all bodies of water in kazrith territory are linked by networks of flooded
tunnels. So if you _do_ want to make an underwater dungeon, you have the perfect
excuse.

### The Numbers

Kazriths are Medium Elemental Magical Beasts with the Demon and Water
keywords. Note that they _don't_ have Aquatic, so they don't gain that +2 attack
bonus when fighting underwater. They're Level 20 Lurkers with 146 HP, an
immunity to acid, and Variable Resistance 20 (2/encounter). They have a ground
speed of 6, a burrow speed of 6 with Tunneling, and a swim speed of 8.

Their basic attack is a **bite** that also deals 5 ongoing acid damage (save
ends). They can also burrow back into the ground while spraying acid behind
them: this **Acidic Retreat** (recharge 5-6) is a close burst 2 vs. Refles,
deals light physical damage, and 10 ongoing acid damage (save ends). It also
allow the demon to burrow its speed as an effect.

When bloodied, its **Acidic Seepage** increases, causing it to gain +4 burrow
speed and deal 10 acid damage to enemies that start their turn adjacent to the
kazrith. Its **Slippery** trait allows it to make extra saves against the
immobilized, slowed and restrained conditions at the start of its turn.

Fighting a kazrith is like playing a corrosive game of whack-a-mole, as it will
keep burrowing back and popping up to bite you, and it's hard to pin down.

### Sample Encounters and Impressions

The sample encounter is Level 18 and features an Evil Party of aboleths, their
minion servitors, and a pair of kazriths.

Kazriths sound like something that should logically exist, but by themselves
they don't really stoke my imagination. They do make decent additions to
adventures featuring varied demons as opposition, and they work well with
Aboleths.

## Needle Demon

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-demon-needle.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These prickly assholes love seeing former friends and allies turn on each other
with murderous intent, particularly when they were the ones who instigated
it. They're much smarter than they look and often end up as advisors to more
powerful villains, sometimes even as the power behind the throne. However, their
lust for infighting often gets the better of them, so these deceptions never
last long and cause terrible damage when they collapse.

### The Numbers

Needle demons are Medium Elemental Humanoids (demons), and Level 12 Controllers
with 123 HP. They have darkvision and Variable Resistance 15 (2/encounter). They
run with speed 6.

They fight with their pincers and spiked tail. The **claw** attack is pretty
standard, and **Claws of Betrayal** allows them to attack twice with them. If
both attacks hit the same target, that target takes 10 ongoing damage (save
ends). The **Tail** is a reaction attack that does light physical damage and is
triggered by an enemy moving to a square adjacent to the demon.

Their most thematic power is **Rage of the Betrayed** (close blast 5 vs. Will;
enemies only; recharge 6), which does no damage but dominates (save ends). Yes,
it's a mass dominate. It works by convincing the affected target that their
allies have betrayed them, so I guess the demon is going to use it to make the
PCs focus on fighting each other instead of itself.

The sample encounters have them working alongside gnolls and drow, but repeat
that it never takes long for them to turn on their own allies.

### Impressions

Simple, but quite effective due to that mass dominate. I'm guessing you could
use a recurring needle demon NPC as a source of lots of drama, having it appear
somewhere in every villainous group the PCs oppose only to always run away.

## Neldrazu

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm2-4e-demon-neldrazu.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These demons are into kidnapping, for which they use their four hooked
claws. During a battle they like to hide around the edges and jump out to snatch
an enemy and drag it either to an isolated spot or into the midst of the
neldrazu's allies. They're often summoned by slavers who don't mind if the goods
are slightly damaged.

### The Numbers

Neldrazu are Large Elemental Humanoids (demons) and Level 8 Lurkers with 71
HP. They have darkvision and Variable Resistance 10 (1/encounter). They have a
ground speed of 8 and a climb speed of 6 with Spider Climb.

Their basic attack is a standard **Claw**, but when only one enemy is within 5
squares of the neldrazu they can really stretch and use **Flaying Claws**, which
do double damage plus ongoing 5 damage (save ends). This means they'll lurk
until they can catch a PC alone, and then move in with this attack.

After using Flaying Claws, a neldrazu will likely follow it up with **Abduct**
(recharge 5-6), a move action attack that targets Reflex and can only be used
against enemies. It does no damage, but teleports the target 10 squares to a
place of the demon's choice on a hit. The demon teleports 10 squares right after
this, either adjacent to the target on a hit, or to anywhere it chooses on a
miss.

I think the best way to use this is to drop an enemy right in the middle of the
neldrazu's allies. If a lurker isolates itself with a PC, things tend to go
poorly for the lurker.

### Impressions

The Monster Manual 3 and later on the Monster Vault would include the Babau, a
level 13 Skirmisher demon that's quite similar, and which we covered
[here][2]. At the time I remember poo-pooing the babau's abduction tactics
because I assumed it would always take the victim to an isolated place, but now
I see it can also take them to its allies instead.

Compared to the babau, the neldrazu is a better team player, since it can abduct
more often in a fight. Its special attack is quite situational, but it can be
used _before_ the abduction, which means it doesn't have to choose between
isolating a victim and bringing it to its allies.

## End of Part 2

There's at least one more post's worth of demons to cover.

[2]: {{ "/2019/11/07/babau.html" | relative_url}}
