---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Mekillot"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
    - lets-read
---

## The Lore

These hill-sized cutie pies are a kind of drake, but they differ enough from
their elementally aligned relatives that they deserve their own entry. In the
wild, these giant armored beasts roam the wastes in small herds, eating plants
and the occasional small animal and laying their eggs near oases.

Mekillots are not voracious predators other drakes, but they're still aggressive
and stubborn in the same way a real-life large herbivore like a rhino or hippo
can be. While their size and armor makes them prime beasts of burden and war,
they need to either be trained for these roles from birth or be kept under tight
psychic control at all times.

Some sorcerer-kings and other defilers think the mekillot's natural size and
aggressiveness isn't lethal enough, and perform bioengineering rituals on their
unhatched eggs to make the resulting creature even bigger and stronger.

## The Numbers

Mekillots are Natural Beasts with the Reptile and Mount tags. They have no
special senses or vulnerabilities. Everything else varies per stat block, and we
get two here.

### Mekillot

The typical member of the species is Huge, and has a ground speed of 7. It's a
Level 10 Soldier with 108 HP. Its basic attack is a Reach 1 **bite** that deals
extra damage to grabbed targets. It can grab them with a Reach 3 **Tongue
Lash**, which attacks Fortitude. On a hit it pulls the target 2 squares, damages
and grabs them. The mekillot can only have one target grabbed like this, but it
can keep biting them for increased damage as described above while the grab
lasts.

Mekillots used as mounts are trained to perform a **Checking Charge**. This
lets them perform a charge that can go through enemy spaces, and each time they
do so they automatically push the enemy 1 square and knock them prone. At the
end of the charge, in addition to the usual attack from the mekillot, its rider
can also make a melee basic attack as a free action. This is an excellent fight
opener, since the push-and-knock-prone effect doesn't require an attack. It lets
the mekillot and its rider go straight to the PC squishies in the back line.

### Mekillot Dirk

This is probably a mekillot mutated by defiling magic to be even bigger. It's
Gargantuan in size, a little slower at Speed 6, and a Level 22 Elite Soldier
with 418 HP.

The dirk is big enough to have **Threatening Reach 2**, as well as a **Wide
Body** that lets other creatures enter and end their move in its space. This
means they're standing on its back -- and that the slope is gentle enough to not
require climbing checks.

The dirk's **bite** works just like that of the standard mekillot, though its
numbers are of course bigger. It can also attack with Reach 2 **Claws**, which
target 1 or 2 creatures. On a hit they deal damage, pull the target 1 square,
and knock it prone. Its Tongue Lash has been upgraded to a Reach 4 **Tongue
Chomp**, which works identically but also allows the creature to make a free
bite attack against the target after pulling it to an adjacent square. This
effectively makes this maneuver a double attack. The text says the tongue only
pulls the victim 1 square, but I think that's an error: it should be 3.

Checking Charge upgrades to **Trample**, which doesn't require a rider. This
lets the mekillot shift twice its speed, enter enemy spaces during the move, and
make free claw attacks against any enemy whose space it enters in this way. So
it's not _guaranteed_ to knock the whole PC party prone any more, but those it
does knock prone will be worse off.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

You're either going to meet a small herd of wild mekillot, 2-3 of them being
used as war mounts by humanoid soliers or brutes, or a mekillot dirk being used
as an armored personal carrier by epic-level artillery and controller villains.

Their mechanics are workable enough, but what really endears mekillots to me is
this illustration. They look like marketable plushies even though they're likely
to trample you to death.
