---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Lamia"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

In Greek mythology, Lamia was a woman cursed by Hera to become a half-human,
half-snake, child-eating monster. The Greeks themselves would end up using the
name for a whole species of such creatures later on, and a few naughty anime
shows would end up adopting it for their own brand of snake lady.

D&D lamias are a bit different, and have been in the game since at least 1st
Edition. Here, they are only present in the MM.

## The Lore

It looks like 1e Lamias were a bit closer to the original myth in that they were
creatures with the upper bodies of women and the lower bodies of beasts. In 4e
they're a type of fey whose true form is that of a swarm of large black scarabs
wrapped around a skeleton, but who can disguise itself as an attractive
humanoid.

D&D lamias are not very nice. They eat people, using their disguise ability to
lure them to their deaths. Some of them also seek to gain arcane power "by any
means necessary". Every person they eat adds another beetle to the swarm, and
when the swarm grows too large a lamia reproduces by slaying a "worthy fey" such
as a powerful eladrin and injecting half its beetles into the corpse. Once the
bugs finish eating the victim's flesh, they rise as a new lamia that shares most
of the victim's memories and knowledge.

In short, they're fey nightmare monsters.

## The Numbers

There's a single lamia stat block. It's a Medium Fey Magical Beast
(shapechanger), and a Level 12 Elite Controller with 244 HP. It has land and
climb speeds of 6 and trained Perception, though no supernatural senses for
seeing in the dark. Their other trained skills are Arcana, Bluff, and Insight.

Lamias are effectively swarms! They take half damage from melee and ranged
attacks, and 10 extra damage from close and area ones. They also have a
**Swarm's Embrace** aura 1 that deals damage to any enemies that start their
turns inside.

The way a lamia kills you is by using its **Change Shape** ability to look like
a pretty girl/boy/other and lure you into favorable ambush terrain with a
convincing sob story. Once the group is packed nice and tight, it will release a
psychic **Pacifying Burst** (close burst 5 vs. Will; recharge 5-6), which does
no damage and stuns on a hit (save ends).

Once everyone is nice and stunned the lamia will cover one of the victims in
part of its scarab mass in a **Devouring Swarm** attack (Reach 5 vs. Fortitude),
which does physical damage on a hit and allows the monster to sustain the effect
as a minor action to deal the same amount of automatic damage every turn. The
only way to escape is to move beyond the power's maximum range, which you can't
do if you're stunned.

If anyone resists the initial burst, or of they recover early, the lamia can hit
them with its **Cursed Touch**, a basic attack against Fortitude that heals the
monster for the same amount of damage caused on the victim. It also dazes on a
hit (save ends).

If all else fails there's the **Squeezing Swarm** trait, which allows the lamia
to squeeze through narrow openings as if it was a Tiny creature, likely by
disassembling into a bunch of individual beetles.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The book says lamias often enslave weaker creatures to serve as
bodyguards. Though their stat blocks don't have powers that allow them to
dominate others in combat, it's quite possible they know custom rituals that
allow for long-term mind control, or just use good old-fashioned mundane
intimidation and cruelty.

The sample encounter is level 12: a lamia, 2 mezzodemons, and 4 cyclops
guards. As this shows, they might also just know enough magic to summon some
demons as muscle.

Lamias are mechanically interesting, though if you dislike the "comely
seductress that actually wants to kill you" trope they might not be your cup of
tea. Their knowledge of magic could allow them to fulfill the same dramatic
roles as hags, but I think they seem a bit too overtly hostile for that.
