---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Silt Horror"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-dscc-silt-horror.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    A silt horror devouring a group of adventurers.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the rest.

## The Lore

As mentioned before, the only sea most Athasians know is the Sea of Silt. The
name here is pretty descriptive - an endless expanse of silvery dust that makes
up the eastern "border" of the Tyr Region. You can sail on it using special
vessels, and its depths conceal many ruins of extinct civilizations, as well as
an extensive ecosystem that's a mystery to most surfacers.

Those who have more experience with the Sea of Silt might know of the [Floating
Mantles][2] who sometimes wander into land, but the thing they fear the most is
the aptly named Silt Horror. These enormous beasts are more or less Darker and
Sunnier krakens, emerging from the deep to wrestle entire ships with their
grasping tentacles and devour them with their bottomless maws.

And that's for the "basic" version that appears close to shore, the one with
white tentacles. Silt sailors who have ventured further away from shore come
back with stories about horrors with brown or gray tentacles who are even
larger - some of them larger than entire city-states. Are these tales true? Who
knows? It's not like it's easy to fact-check them.

## The Numbers

We only get the "basic" white-tentacled silt horror here. The bigger versions,
if they exist, are left as an exercise for the GM. Unlike a standard D&D Kraken,
the silt horror is not sapient, but that doesn't make it less dangerous.

The creature is so large that we get a stat block for the main body and a couple
of different stat blocks for its tentacles, which act like minions and
regenerate fast enough to keep coming back in the same fight after being
"slain".

### Silt Horror

The main body of the creature is a Huge Aberrant Beast and a Level 12 Solo
Lurker with 496 HP. It has a ground speed of 2 and a burrow speed of 6 on soft
earth, which is like a swim speed on the Sea of Silt. It's Blind, and therefore
immune to the blinded conditions and to all gaze attacks. It perceives the world
via Termorsense 20.

The horror's main trait covers its **Regenerating Tentacles**. Any time when the
horror has less than 4 tentacles within 20 squares of itself, a number of new
tentacles appear until it has 4. The horror chooses which types they are from
the three available (constricting, raking, sweeping). They appear above ground
even if the main body is burrowing, and act on their own initiative, rolled when
they appear.

The main body itself has a fairly basic **Bite** attack, but the star of the
show here is the **Chomping Maw** maneuver, which deals almost double the damage
and can target up to two creatures. The restriction here is that the main body
must be entirely underground to attack, and the targets must be grabbed by
tentacles.

As a move action, it can **Submerge**, burrowing its way to a space that's
entirely underground. This recharges whenever it's on the surface, so it's more
or less at will. And when one of its tentacles is reduced to 0 HP with a melee
attack, it can make a free melee attack of its own before disappearing, dealing
10 extra damage and pushing the triggering PC 5 squares instead of grabbing
them.

### Silt Horror Tentacles

All three tentacle types are very similar to each other, so we'll cover them
in the same entry.

First, the common traits: all three are Level 12 Minions. They have ground and
burrow speeds of 6, and act as sensory organs with the same Tremorsense 20 as
the main body. They're obviously **Attached** to the silt horror and cannot be
more than 20 squares from the main body. They're also **Unhindered**, which as
we know means they can pull any grabbed victims along with them when they move.

All three tentacles have a basic **Seize** attack, which deals physical damage
and grabs the victim. The stats that vary between the three types are their
creature roles, and what they can do with a grabbed victim using their second
attack.

- **Constricting** tentacles are Soldiers and their **Constricting Grab**
  damages and dazes the victim for a turn.

- **Raking** tentacles are Skirmishers and their **Sweeping Grab** damages and
  slides the victim 3 squares to a space adjacent to the tentacle.

- **Sweeping** tentacles are Brutes and their **Suffocating Grab** damages and
  knocks prone.

Even after the special attacks, the victims remain grabbed - use the standard
rules to try to get away.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

Silt Horrors will most likely be found alone. They're not sapient so they don't
form alliances, and they're impossible to tame. At most you might find them
already fighting another victim, such as a different ship, or a giant who was
wading through the Sea. These fellow targets might be friendly to the PCs, or
they might not.

Another possibility is an horror intruding upon an already ongoing fight against
those other ships or giants...

The mechanics here are very interesting. The tentacles want to grab as many
victims as possible and do nasty things to them while bringing them closer to
the main body's location. The main body wants to stay underground until two
victims are in reach, use Chomping Maw on them, and then use Submerge to get
away again. As long as at least one PC remains grabbed, the horror could do this
every turn.



[1]: {{ "/projects/dscc/" | relative_url }}
[2]: {{ "/2025/06/10/wir-dscc-floating-mantle.html" | relative_url }}
