---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Witchlight Lizardfolk"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I'll get this out of the way first: this entry fully buys into all the tired
racist stereotypes for D&D humanoids. Already in its second sentence, it calls
them "primitive, trival, cruel" and cannibalistic. I'm going to strip all of
this out and try to present a less bad version.

## The Lore

There are several lizardfolk tribes living in the Witchlight Fens. A good number
of them are under the rule of the dragon Shadowmire, but not all. All of them
are territorial and tend to distrust outsiders, as mentioned in the Monster
Manual 1 version of their writeups.

The Witchlight Fens got this name because the local fauna includes several
different times of "witchlights", mundane or magical creatures that are capable
of producing spheres of glowing light visible in the distance. One species,
known as "fastlights", usually tries to flee from living creatures, but the
lizardfolk of the Fens have learned to trap and tame them.

The three largest tribes in the area are the **Brackmarshes**, who
enthusiastically swore loyalty to Shadowmire and as a result have been able to
conquer much of the northern and western portions of the Fens, driving their
rivals out; the **Mistkillers** who live in the eastern sector and feud with the
Daggerburg goblins, only occasionally obeying the dragon; and the
**Crushwater**, who live in the fens' central region and fiercely resist
draconic dominance.

None of them are likely to receive PCs who don't belong to the same tribe with
open arms, but I think it should at least be possible to negotiate with
them. The Brackmarshes or other tribes you add that are more directly controlled
by Shadowmire are even less likely to be friendly to people who don't also serve
the dragon, and will probably make a good portion of his ground troops.

## The Numbers

All of the tribes mentioned here have a mix of all three standard lizardfolk
ethnicities, and can contain a mix of the standard stat blocks from the Monster
Vault or other sources. We also get a new batch of stats that apply to them
specifically and can be used elsewhere.

As usual, the lizardfolk here have a speed of 6 and Swamp Walk, and have no
special senses or resistances.

### Lizardfolk Mire Scout

A quick but fragile scout with a pet fastlight. It's a level 3 Minion
Skirmisher. It fights in melee with **claws** that let it shift 2 squares as an
effect, but prefers to keep away and harass enemies with **Fastlight Shots**
that do radiant damage.

### Lizardfolk Bog Walker

A beefier warrior who's more at home than usual in the water. This is a Level 3
Soldier with 44 HP and a swim speed of 4 in addition to its normal movement
described above. The bog walker can make basic **claw** attacks, but it prefers
to grab its does and drown them with **Drag Down**.

This can only be done if the bog walker is in water at least 1 square deep, and
doesn't already have a grabbed victim. It's a melee attack vs. Reflex, and on a
hit it damages and grabs the target (escape DC 13). Until the grab ends, the
target must make a DC 13 Endurance check at the start of their turns, and take
10 damage if that check fails. Even on a miss with the initial attack, the
target is still immobilized for a turn.

10 damage per turn is a lot for the early Heroic tier. PCs are at a real risk of
drowning if they have a run of bad luck on their rolls and don't get help.

### Lizardfolk Fen Spy

This Level 4 Lurker is also proficient in the use of fastlights as a weapon.  It
can use its **Witchlight Mists** ability to become invisible as an at-will
standard action, and from there it can use a ranged **Fastlight Strike** to deal
heavy radiant damage, inflict ongoing 5 radiant damage, and blind (save ends
both). If it can't become invisible again due to PC pressure, it will use basic
attacks with its **thorn dagger**, which deal poison damage and inflict a -2
penalty to AC and Reflex.

### Lizardfolk Shocker

A spellcaster specializing in lightning magic, it's Level 5 Artillery with 50
HP. The shocker wields a **Greatclub** in melee, and slings lightning spells at
range. There's the single-target at will **Witch Lightning**, and there's the
encounter **Ball of Lightning**, which is basically a fireball with a different
element.

When someone hits then with a ranged or area attack, they can react with a
**sudden jolt** that deals automatic lightning damage to the attacker, which
means you want to close on them fast instead of trading shots from afar.

### Lizardfolk Dreadtail

A warrior who believes you shouldn't skip tail day at the gym. Dreadtails are
Level 5 Soldiers with 52 HP. They fight with **spears** that damage and mark for
a turn, but they can also use Reach 2 **tail slaps** that do less damage but
target Reflex and knock prone on a hit. Their **Slap Down** maneuver (recharge
5+) allows them to use both in a single action. If someone marks the dreadtail,
its **Spirit Interference** reaction marks the offender right back.

Dreadtails want to mark dangerous PCs, and then keep them prone with repeated
tail slaps. There's no special ability to punish a PC who ignores the mark, but
it's hard to fight anyone while prone.

### Lizardfolk Dreadnought

A chieftain or lieutenant whose Large size ensures it's a terrifying sight in
battle. It's a Level 7 Elite Brute with 190 HP and the Leader tag. The
**Dreadnought's Wrath** is a palpable thing that acts as an aura (2) which
gives allies inside a +2 bonus to hit and damage.

Like most brutes, dreadnoughts want to be right in the thick of the melee. Their
skills make them excellent at disrupting the enemy front line and opening the
way to the squishies at the back. Their basic **Greatclub** attacks do heavy
damage, push the target 2 squares, and let the dreadnought shift 2 squares to
chase the enemy. As minor actions, they can distribute **Low Blows** that target
Fortitude, do the same damage, and knock prone.

Once the way is opened, they can the **You Fight Now!** minor action to let an
ally within 5 squares make a free charge attack. This ally and any others who
make it through will then stick close to their boss to enjoy that attack bonus.

### Lizardfolk Chief

A more sophisticated leader with a simpler stat block, the chief is a Level 7
Soldier with 156 HP. It fights with a **Battleaxe** whose blows slow for a turn
on a hit, and can make **Double Attacks** with it. If an enemy adjacent to the
chief shifts, it can attack them with a **Tail Lash** that does light physical
damage and knocks prone. Once per encounter it can use **Fighting Spirit** to
allow every ally in a close burst 2 to make a free basic attack.

The chief works well as the core of the enemy front-line, using its slow and
trip powers to keep PCs from reaching its squishier buddies.

### Lizardfolk Marsh Mystic

This is a variant of the Bog Mystic from the Monster Vault, of a lower level and
with some abilities replaced by Witchlight-specific traits. It's a Level 4
Controller (Leader) with 53 HP.

Its first novel trait is **Marsh Mist**, a very wide aura (10!) that prevents
allies inside from being surprised and gives them a +5 to Perception and
Stealth. Its **spear** can damage and slide targets 2 squares on a hit, and its
main ranged attack is a **Fastlight Shock** that deals lightning and radiant
damage, and immobilizes for a turn. If the target was already immobilized, it's
dazed instead. On a miss, it slows for a turn with no damage.

The mystic can also cast a **Bog Cloud**, an encounter Area Burst 1 that deals
poison damage and dazes (save ends) on a hit. On a miss, it deals half damage
and forces targets to grant combat advantage (save ends).

These are excellent ambush leaders whose presence will all but guarantee the
PCs are surprised, and whose riders on their many attacks will keep them locked
down for Team Monster's strikers.

## Final Impression

There's good mechanical variety here, but I am very unimpressed with the book's
default portrayal of lizardfolk. This is a big let-down after the Wandering Tower.
