---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Dragon of Tyr"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

In a monster book for some other D&D world, we'd be seeing dragons right about
now. In Dark Sun, there's just the one. I honestly thought we'd see this guy in
the Important NPCs half of the book, yet here he is.

## The Lore

Everyone in Athas knows and fears the Dragon of Tyr. This great and terrible
monster comes in from the deep desert every once in a while, and demands a huge
tribute of treasure and slaves. Even the sorcerer-kings fear him, and so they
scramble to meet his demands. Once that's done, the Dragon flies home with his
loot, leaving the region alone until his next appearance.

All of this is common knowledge. Only the sorcerer-kings themselves know the
full story: the Dragon was once one of them. His original name was Borys the
Butcher, and like his colleagues he was one of the fifteen secret apprentices of
Rajaat the Sorcerer.

You see, arcane magic on Athas is a truly unnatural phenomenon, a flaw that
slipped into the world when the primordials defeated the gods way back when
Athas was still green. Rajaat was the first mortal to discover and master arcane
magic. He was also the first to learn that you could pull a little more power
from the surrounding world to cast bigger spells - in other words, the first
defiler.

Rajaat taught dozens of pupils, but he only taught the secret of defiling to his
inner circle of fifteen secret apprentices. For Rajaat was a major asshole, and
when he felt his champions were ready, he ordered them to go out on a worldwide
genocidal rampage to cleanse Athas of all the species he deemed "impure". So
much defiling magic was flung around in those wars that Athas' previously green
ecosystem was completely destroyed, starting the world's transformation into the
desert it is today.

Eventually Champions became convinced that all of this was a bit too much, so
they returned to Rajaat and, led by Borys, managed to rebel against him and
imprison him in a pocket dimension outside of time and space. The former
Champions quickly conquered or built city-states in one of the last habitable
regions of Athas, setting themselves up as the Sorcerer-Kings.

By then, they knew that attaining the pinnacle of power as a defiler would lead
to transformation into a dragon. Borys, who had taken it upon himself to guard
Rajaat's prison, successfully argued that the other Sorcerer-Kings should help
him speedrun the transformation, since he'd need the power to contain their
former master forever. And so they did.

The ritual for the final transformation required the sacrifice of every citizen
of Ebe, the island city Borys ruled. Borys renamed the resulting hellish
wasteland to Ur Draxa, the City of Doom. The Dragon dwells in the ruins of Ur
Draxa's palace to this day, leaving the city only to collect his tributes.

The city itself is inhabited by a very large number of undead, and by the living
slaves brought in as tribute. The city's day to day operation is in the hands of
the Dead Lords, a council of liches who serve the Dragon.

The Dragon keeps their soul vessels (the book uses the p-word here) hidden deep
within his palace to ensure compliance. He is wise to do this, for the Lord
Vizier who leads the council has his own agenda. He's secretly researching a way
to cross into the Astral Sea and escape Athas altogether, and often sends his
personal minions out on missions to recover any bit of planar lore he hears
about.

## The Numbers

We get stats for the Dragon of Tyr and for the Lord Vizier in this entry. The
two are completely different, of course, so we'll cover all their traits in
their respective entries.

### The Dragon of Tyr

The only dragon in Athas is a Gargantuan Natural Magical Beast with the Dragon
tag (obviously). He's also a Level 33 Solo Controller with 1216 HP, Darkvision,
ground and flight speeds of 10, and a teleport speed of 5. He can hover,
too. His alignment is Chaotic Evil.

The **Dragon's Actions** trait means old Borys doesn't roll initiative at
all. He has three whole turns per round at initiative counts 40, 30, and 20. He
cannot delay or ready actions.

His basic attack is a massive Reach 4 **Claw** that damages and strips all
necrotic and psychic resistance on a hit (save ends). His **bite** deals more or
less the same damage and immobilizes (save ends), with a Slow aftereffect (save
ends).

He can also use wider swipes to perform the **Raking Claws** attack, attacking
all enemies in a Close Blast 4 for slightly less damage than the single-target
version and also sliding them 2 squares on a hit.

That's it for physical attacks. Now for the spells and psychic powers, because
of course he has both!

The **Dragon's Defiling** is a hazard all on its own, targetting all creatures
in a Close Burst 5 and dealing necrotic damage on a hit. He can use the energy
gathered with this to cast **Defiling Death** (ranged 10), dealing heavy
necrotic damage and ongoing 20 necrotic damage to the target (save ends). After
the first failed save, the ongoing damage increases to 30!

The Dragon of Tyr starts the fight with Defiling Death charged, and once it's
cast he must hit with Dragon's Defiling to recharge the attack.

Once the Dragon is bloodied, he can use his **Breath of Shredding Sand**,
attacking all creatures in a _Close Blast 20_ and dealing the same amount of
damage as the bite on a hit, half on a miss. Fortunately this is an encounter
power and doesn't recharge.

Finally, if the PCs manage to surround Borys, he can use a **Telekinetic Pulse**
(encounter), a Close Burst 5 that deals the same damage as the bite, pushes its
targets 5 squares, and knocks them prone. On a miss, it deals half damage and
pushes 3 squares.

The Dragon can use his move action on a **Psionic Uplift**, automatically
pushing every adjacent enemy 2 squares and flying his Speed + 2 (i.e, 12
squares). If an enemy ends its movement within 4 squares of the Dragon, he can
hit them with his **Lashing Tail** as a reaction, dealing the same damage as the
claw and knocking them prone. And when the dragon is first bloodied, Telekinetic
Pulse recharges and he can use it immediately as a free action.

The physical attacks all target AC, the necrotic and tekekinetic ones all target
Fortitude, and the sand breath targets Reflex. As the most powerful arcane
caster in the whole world, you can say he knows pretty much every ritual.

### The Lord Vizier

This is the oldest and most powerful lich among the council of Dead Lords, which
makes him their leader. Ostensibly, he un-lives to serve his master the Dragon,
but as we saw he's also privately looking for a way off this dying rock. He is a
Medium Natural Humanoid with the Undead tag, and Level 26 Elite Artillery. He
has Speed 6, and Darkvision. He's immune to diseases like all undead, and has
Resist 15 Necrotic and Resist 10 Poison. His alignment is Evil.

The Lord Vizier has a **Necrotic Aura** (5) that deals 10 necrotic damage to
anyone who enters it or starts their turn inside. Like all liches, he's
**Indestructible** while his soul vessel remains intact: when reduced to 0 HP,
his body and possessions become dust and reform within 1d10 days near the
vessel.

He wields the **Dead Lord's Scepter**, and his basic attack is to bonk someone
with it, dealing lightning-and-necrotic damage. His basic ranged attack is the
**Grasp of the Dead** spell (range 20 vs. Fortitude), which deals necrotic
damage and leats one undead creature adjacent to the target make a free melee
basic attack. If the attack hits, the creature marks the target for a turn.

He can also cast a **Plume of Death** (area 2 within 10 vs. Fortitude, recharge
5+), a fireball-sized spell that deals acid-and-necrotic damage and summons a
Vizier's Skeleton on a square within the burst.

As a move action, the Lord can draw on his secret knowledge and perform a brief
**Planar Displacement**, teleporting 15 squares and leaving a brand-new Vizier's
Skeleton in the origin square.

### Vizier's Skeleton

These sophisticated undead minions are constantly produced by the Lord Vizier's
special attacks, and he will probably have a whole bunch of them on hand when
the fight starts in addition to some powerful non-minion undead. They're Medium
Natural Animates (undead) and Level 26 Minion Brutes who fight with **Deadflame
Swords** that do fire-and-necrotic damage, and can shoot **Chill Shards**
(Ranged 10) to do cold-and-necrotic damage.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

When met outside his city, the Dragon is always alone and on a specific
mission. He will usually completely ignore most people who have nothing to do
with his goal, believing they are beneath his notice. Of course, if those people
are stupid enough to pick a fight with him, he is only too glad to oblige,
completely confident of his victory and with good reason.

If he is attacked _in Ur Draxa_, I imagine the Dead Lords would join the fight
too. Better bring an army or ten.

The Lord Vizier generally obeys the Dragon's every order and kills whoever he
wants dead. I wonder if he can be met in friendlier terms when following his own
agenda. Epic PCs would make perfect agents for recovering that lost lore without
the Dragon noticing.
