---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Crocodile"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Crocodiles exist in real life and frequently feature in media such as nature
documentaries, so if you're reading this you probably already know what they
look like. For a long time everyone thought crocodiles were the closest thing
you could get to dinosaurs in the modern day, then they discovered that honor
belonged to chickens.

The Monster Vault has stats for a "mundane" crocodile in its animal appendix,
and the Monster Manual has two fantastic varieties that are more likely to
attack adventurers.

## Crocodile

This is the one from the Monster Vault. Since it's in the appendix and not in a
full entry, there's no lore at all. The mundane crocodile is a Medium Natural
Beast (reptile), and a Level 3 Soldier with 46 HP. It has low-light vision, a
land speed of 4 and a swim speed of 8. It attacks with a bite that does damage
and grabs on a hit, and once it's grabbed someone it can inflict automatic
damage on the victim as a standard action. Short and simple. The grab has an
escape DC of 13.

We'll have to fall back to the standard cliches here: they live in lakes, rivers
and swamps and hunt by looking like floating logs until something small and
meaty gets within charge range. I imagine mundane crocs won't go out of their
way to attack PCs, but might become violent if they feel threatened or are
protecting their young.

## Visejaw Crocodile

The first fantastic variety from the Monster Manual. Its scales are grey and a
red streak menaces with leathery spikes on its back. The visejaw crocodile is a
Large Natural Beast (reptile), and a Level 4 Soldier with 58 HP. It has a ground
speed of 6 and a swim speed of 8, and its attacks are pretty almost identical to
those of the mundane crocodile.

This crocodile's jaws don't inflict automatic damage on grabbed targets, but
instead make an attack against Fortitude with half damage on a miss. Fixing the
damage bugs on this one would also involve dropping the attack and making this
damage automatic.

## Feymire Crocodile

The platonic ideal of a man-eating crocodile. This Huge Fey Beast (reptile) is
so good at looking like a log in a bog it actually has vegetation sprouting from
its back, and carries the swamp with it wherever it goes. It's native to the
Feywild but also inhabits the world in places where the two planes
touch. Interestingly enough it seems to be able to sustain itself by putting
down roots, but it obviously prefers the tender meat of adventurers.

The feymire crocodile is a Level 10 Elite Soldier with 216 HP. That bit about it
carrying the swamp with it is not an exaggeration! It has a Feymire aura that
makes the ground in a 2-square radius from itself difficult terrain for
enemies. It also has Regeneration 5, which can be temporarily shut down with
fire damage. Yes, it has the same staying power as a troll. It's also nearly as
smart at Int 5, though being a Beast it's not sapient as such.

Other traits include low-light vision and the expected swim speed of 8. It
attacks with stronger versions of the grabby bite and clamping jaws from the
other two crocs, and needs the same fix as the visejaw. In addition, if it grabs
a bloodied Medium or smaller creature, it can try to Swallow it. This is an
attack against Fortitude; if it hits, the target goes into the croc's gullet,
becoming dazed, restrained, and taking ongoing 10 acid damage until free.

I used to think restrained meant you couldn't take any actions, but a restrained
target can still make attacks at a -2 penalty. The Feymire Crocodile's Swallow
ability places a further restriction: the swallowed victim may only make basic
attacks against the insides of the croc. Yes, you still have to beat its
defenses. Not much of a problem for the fighter or warlord, but nearly everyone
else is in trouble.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

The suggested encounter in the Monster Manual is a party of lizardfolk and their
visejaw pet. I imagine the feymire crocodile would be the sort of animal to hang
out with trolls or bog hags.

The feymire croc is definitely my favorite of the lot. It gives me a nice
fairytale vibe.
