---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: River Rats"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

A very specific group that makes the city of Fallcrest its home.

## The Lore

Before we talk about the River Rats, I figure it's useful to talk a bit about
Fallcrest itself. This is information from both the DMG and this book.

Fallcrest grew around a small fort (Moonstone Keep) originally built to guard a
portage site around a big waterfall in the Nentir River. Trade boats from the
south had no problem reaching this point, but for their cargo to keep traveling
north it had to be unloaded and hauled to the top of the limestone cliffs around
the waterfall that would eventually give the city its name. Boats from the south
dock and unload in the Lower Quays, and boats going north load and depart from
the Upper Quays.

The place was a prosperous trade hub for many years, but it was hit hard by the
Bloodspear invasion. It hasn't recovered completely even after all these years,
since the volume of trade coming in from the river was severely reduced by the
fall of Nerath.

The cliffs split the city into two districts, Hightown and Lowtown. Hightown is
the wealthier half, located at the more defensible top of the cliff. It suffered
relatively little during the sack of the city and was the first area to be
rebuilt and resettled.

Lowtown is the poorer half, located at the foot of the cliff. It was almost
completely razed back during the invasion, and only began to see new
construction much later, as the city began growing again. There are still
significant stretches of it that are abandoned or ruined, which make good
hideouts for the city's criminal element.

That finally brings us to the River Rats, which are a significant faction in
that criminal element. This gang is kinda Dickensian in nature: it started with
a band of human and halfling orphans who banded together for survival. Most of
its members are grownups in our narrative present, but they still recruit new
members by taking in street urchins. I bet this gives the gang's members a big
sense of camaraderie, of it being them against the world.

Like the urchin gang in Oliver Twist, the River Rats also have a leader and
patron who benefits from their crimes. His name is Kelson, the halfling who owns
the Lucky Gnome Taphouse. This tavern is the cheapest and rowdiest of
Fallcrest's establishments, catering to dockworkers and porters. Despite the
unsavory reputations of the Taphouse and its owner, Kelson has not yet been
linked to the activities of the River Rats.

The gang has a wide repertoire, from pickpocketing to rigged games of chance to
mugging and the odd smuggling job or protection racket. The most profitable of
their activities consists of burglarizing the warehouses near the Lower
Quays. Kelson chooses targets based on the information he overhears in the
Taphouse, and his gang is very enthusiastic about following through. This makes
the lives of the merchants who make use of the place extremely hard. These
merchants must carefully weight the risk of losing their merchandise against the
abusive monopoly prices charged by the Porter's Guild to haul the cargo to safer
storage spaces in the Upper Quays. All of this adds up to quite an obstacle to
the health of the city's economy.

Kelson dreams of expanding the River Rats into a true criminal syndicate with
chapters on every city in the Vale, but before he focuses on that he wants to
eliminate all his rivals in Fallcrest. If his plans succeed, Fallcrest could be
the site of a bloody gang war.

## The Numbers

As a hostile faction that resides in Fallcrest itself, the River Rats are early
to mid-Heroic threats.
