---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Steel Predator"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I think I first saw this monster in one of the "late" Monster Manuals for 3.x,
which makes it fairly recent.

## The Lore

Designed by Bane himself ("Original Design: Do Not Steal"), these living
constructs are designed as long-ranging assassination engines. They seem to be
his take on the "Retriever" concept pioneered by the primordials, with the main
difference being that the god of war is not interested in taking prisoners.

Steel Predators are a little weaker individually, but unlike the retrievers
they're still in production. They can travel the planes in search of their
target, though their means of travel is not quick enough to be a combat
ability. These things just love eating magic items: the more loaded the victim,
the more vigorous the pursuit. Once a steel predator kills its target it will
usually devour them, items and all. They also have a bit of golem-like magical
resistance that means they get stronger when they take thunder or lightning
damage.

As a side effect of this refined palate, steel predator bodies are rich in
residuum, which can ironically make them a target for powerful, brave or
foolhardy hunters looking for a big score. When not on a mission, most steel
predators hang out in Bane's native plane of Chernoggar, patrolling it alongside
platoons of bladelings.

## The Numbers

Steel Predators are Large Immortal Animates with the Living Construct
keyword. They're Level 20 Elite Soldiers with 388 HP, darkvision, and a ground
speed of 8. As mentioned above, they can cross planar boundaries but this
ability doesn't make it into their combat stat block. They have a +2 bonus to
saves against ongoing damage (for a total of +4 when combined with their elite
save bonus).

These creatures have the body structure of a big cat, and they fight
accordingly, pouncing and biting with their metal jaws. Their basic **bite**
attack marks for a turn on a hit. They can also make a **Vicious Pounce** that
works as a charge against Fortitude, does the same damage as a bite, and knocks
prone. Their multiattack ability is a bit weaker than a standard double attack,
but it's still flavorful: **Snap Jaw** allows the steel predator to make a bite
attack. If that hits it also knocks the target prone, and the creature can make
another bite attack against a different target.

Their most overtly supernatural attack is a **Resonating Roar**, a Close Burst 3
attack that deals heavy thunder damage, dazes, and deafens (save ends
both). This is a "recharge 5+" attack, but it also recharges automatically when
the predator takes thunder or lightning damage.

Finally, when an adjacent creature shifts, they can use **Shifting Steel** as a
reaction to shift into the vacated square.

Tactics are fairly simple: pounce, roar, then keep biting with Snap Jaw until
the roar recharges. This should keep the PCs quite busy while the other monsters
attack them.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

These things look enough like xenomorphs from _Aliens_ that I'm surprised they
don't have acid blood. Maybe that would be too on the nose.

As mentioned above, Bane often sends steel predators on remote missions. They
end up working alongisde other servants of the god, or with other creatures that
share the same immediate goals. In that latter case, they're known for turning
on their allies of convenience if those allies behave in a way that displeases
Bane.

The example encounter is Level 21, and has 2 steel predators accompanying 2
marut castigators. The maruts are likely mercenaries hired by an agent of Bane.
