---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Thayan Encounters"
tags:
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
    - dnd4
---

The encounter table includes a _lot_ of undead, and some spellcasters like the
Human Transmuter from the MV to act as living Red Wizards. Valindra's special
projects also get some consideration here, and then we move on to the lich
herself.

## The Neverwinter Nine

These were the renowned bodyguards of Lord Nasher Alagondar a century ago. After
their deaths, they were buried in the castle crypts in honor of their exemplary
service. Should Valindra manage to animate them as undead, they'd have the stats
of a Deathlock Wight from the MV or the stats for a Unhallowed Wight presented
in this book (level 7 soldier, 80 hp, claws that immobilize and drain healing
surges, auto-damage as an opportunity action on enemies who pass a saving
throw). You can also use similar undead monstrosities if you want to.

Members of the Neverwinter Nine get two extra powers in addition to whatever
their base stat block gives them. **One in Nine** is an encounter power that
lets the creature teleport and swap places with another of the Nine that's
within 20 squares. And **Change Shape** lets them take the form of a Medium
humanoid they killed during the last encounter, lasting until they use the power
again or cancel the transformation.

That last one means the Nine can serve story roles as infiltrators. One might
even manage to replace Lord Neverember or another big shot.

## Ash Zombie

These are zombies produced by the particular conditions of the eruption disaster
area. They leave a trail of ash in their wake and are drawn to "fresh" life, the
younger the better.

Any corporeal undead can be converted into the "Ash" equivalent with the
addition of the **Puff of Ash** encounter power. When the creature is first
bloodied, this triggers and enemy Fortitude in a Close Burst 2. A hit makes the
target grant combat advantage and prevents them from spending healing surges
(save ends both).

## Lorragauth

Lorragauth was a particularly despicable elder black dragon who died in the
process of destroying his own domain, which he started doing because he realized
he was dying. If he couldn't have it, then no one else could!

If Valindra succeeds at reanimating him, he's going to use the stats for a
dracolich from the Monster Vault or the Forgotten Realms Campaign
Setting. Either is going to make him a Level 12 Solo Controller and one the most
powerful monsters in the entire campaign.

## Valinda Shadowmantle

Valindra is much like a typical lich in that she's extremely arrogant,
egotistical and ambitious. She serves Tam because it suits her for now and is a
very competent lieutenant, but her arrogance makes her prone to underestimating
her opposition.

She has complete confidence that her soul vessel is securely hidden and will
never be found by any of her enemies, so she doesn't fear destruction and fights
with seemingly suicidal zeal to protect her plans.

How right she is depends on how the GM wishes to play her. If they want the PCs
to defeat her after a single climatic battle, the vessel is right there in her
inner sanctum at the Dread Ring. If they want to make her a recurring threat,
it's hidden in the far away Thayan city of Scorrus (which is covered later in
the book).

Velindra's stats shows us she was an eladrin in life, probably a sun elf. She's
a Level 9 Elite Controller with 188 HP. She has a ground speed of 6, a flight
speed of 4, and darkvision.

Her basic melee attack is a **Vampiric Touch** that deals necrotic damage and
heals Valindra for the same amount. This will be quite annoying to PCs and
greatly increase her staying power. Her basic ranged attack is a **Phantom
Claw** that targets one or two creatures, deals necrotic and psychic damage, and
immobilizes (save ends). Each failed saving throw lets her slide the target 2
squares. On a miss, the target is still slowed (save ends).

She has a **Profane Fire** attack that's pretty much a fireball that does
necrotic and fire damage, and recharges when she's bloodied. And she retains the
**Fey Step** she had in life.

As minor actions, she can use one of two encounter powers. **Shadow Cloak**
gives her insubstantial and phasing but prevents her from taking standard
actions until she ends the whole effect as a free action. And **Reanimate** lets
her bring a dead non-minion ally back into the fight as an undead creature. The
creature comes back with HP equal half its bloodied value and gains Resist
Necrotic 10 and Vulnerable Radiant 5. The target must have been a living
creature before dying - if it was undead already, this doesn't work.

## Impressions

Which of these is the Thayan's most fearsome weapon depends on how you want to
play them. If they're an insidious and secretive threat in your campaign, then
you'll get a lot of mileage out of the Neverwinter Nine and their ability to
replace key people in other organizations. If they're a more direct and forceful
enemy, facing Lorragauth is a distinct possibility in the PCs' futures.

Either way, Valindra herself is a key player and should likely be there for the
final fight. PCs might end up facing her a few times before then, depending on
how secure you want her soul vessel to be. Finding it could be a neat series of
adventures in itself.
