---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Gith"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

## The Lore

One of the things we learned about the cosmology of Athas early in the Campaign
Setting reading is that its Shadowfell is locally known as the Gray, and it's
suspected to block access to the Astral Sea and any other worlds beyond.

This becomes relevant here, because the people known as the Gith are said to
have arrived on Athas long ago, sailing from beyond the Gray in silvery
ships. Once here, however, they found out they couldn't go back. To make matters
worse, these alien visitors found out that they were particularly susceptible to
the corruptive influences of Athasian arcane magic, which turned them Darker and
Sunnier over the generations.

Present-day gith are more monstrous in appearance than the ones you're used
to. Their mindset is also more monstrous, which is saying something considering
these were probably githyanki invaders to start with. Despite the mutations
they've undergone, they retain their psychic abilities.

Gith organize in nomadic hunter communities, wandering through the moutains and
the Tablelands region. They make no particular distinction between standard
animals and sapient outsiders when it comes to chosing their prey, and think
both make fine eating. Some Gith groups are dedicated to gathering the scattered
parts of their original ships, hoping to reassemble them so they can get off
this rock.

## The Numbers

Gith are Medium Natural Humanoids with Speed 6. Their signature power is the
same as that of standard githyanki: **Telekinetic Leap**, an encounter power
that lets them fly 5 squares as a move action. Other attacks and abilities vary
with training.

### Gith Savage

The rank-and-file of any large gith raiding force, the book describes their
lives as nasty, brutish, and short. These Level 4 Minion Skirmishers fight with
obsidian-tipped spears.

The gith's basic **Spear** attack damages and lets it shift 1 square. Once per
encounter they can enhance one attack into a **Telekinetic Pierce**, which
targets Fortitude, deals the same damage and pushes the target 1 square. I think
this above might be the first psychic power I've seen that _doesn't_ target
Will. There are a few others in this entry.

### Gith Hobbler

These hunters are level 4 Artillery with 46 HP. They prefer to stay far away
throwing Range 20 **Javelins**. Once per encounter they can throw a particularly
well-aimed **Pinning Javelin**, that does a bit more damage and immobilizes
(save ends).

If someone gets too close, they're subject to the hobbler's aura (1) of **Brain
Fog**, which inflicts a -2 penalty to attacks and damage to enemies inside. I
wonder if there's one of these near me these days. Someone who insists on
attacking them in melee might force the hobbler to use its **bone dagger**,
which does light damage and lets them shift 1 square on a hit.

### Gith Spearhead

A front-line fighter wielding a barbed obsidian-headed spear. It's a Level 5
Brute with 76 HP. The **Vicious Spear** is pretty strong, as expected of a
brute, and can be used in a **Focused Stab** (recharge 4+) that deals more
damage and knocks prone. If the target is bloodied, the attack deals _even more_
damage and dazes (save ends).

If the spearhead is reduced to 0 HP, it lets out an **Ancestor's Appeal**, a
Close Burst 1 that targets Fortitude and deals psychic damage. In addition to
the damage, a hit also inflicts ongoing 5 psychic damage, and a further 5
psychic damage whenever the target uses a daily or encounter power (save ends
both).

### Git Drone

Drones are gith that show increased psychic aptitude as children, and are
subject to a torturous training regimen to further develop their powers. They're
Level 5 Controllers with 62 HP.

Drones emit a **Brain Fog** aura that works like the hobbler's, but is much
wider in radius (3). They fight with **Bone Daggers** in melee and with
**Telekinetic Thrusts** at up to range 5. These deal force damage, and slide 2
squares.

Every so often they can use a **Psychic Nova** (recharge 5+). This is an Area
Burst 1 Within 5 that targets Reflex, deals untyped damage, and makes the target
suffer 5 psychic damage whenever they use a daily or encounter power (save
ends). If the target is bloodied, it instead deals ongoing 5 damage (save ends).

## Encounters and Final Impressions

The one time I briefly played a Dark Sun game, one of the PCs was a "standard"
gith fighter, so I had thought the gith of Athas were both unchanged from their
astral relatives and playable. Turns out I was wrong! Mechanically they're still
similar to githyanki, but their look and feel is pretty different than what I
expected, and there are no rules for gith PCs in the Campaign Setting.

Gith are commonly found in all-gith hunting parties, perhaps accompanied by
domesticated baazrags or other trained beasties. They can also be found in mixed
parties of People, whether as willing members or as slaves commanded to fight.
