---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Giant"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - dark-sun
    - lets-read
---


Athas has a lot of the same giants we can see in the Monster Manuals and Monster
Vault. Athasian giants are less militarily aggressive than their counterparts in
other worlds, but they still don't like interacting with the "small folk". They
prefer to make their homes in isolated islands on the Silt Sea. A giant who
wants to visit the mainland can often just _wade through_ what to them is
chest-high silt. PCs might be able to negotiate a ride with such a giant, if
they're diplomatic enough.

In this entry we'll take a look at two Athas-specific giants, whose descriptions
will help explain why they don't like the small ones very much.

## Beast Giants

Beast Giants are the product of psionic experimentation by ancient masters of
the Way, who have stabilized into their own species. They have bodies similar to
that of hill giants, but the heads of beasts.

Each giant's head is different, and can be similar to that of any Athasian
beast, whether currently living or extinct. So PCs might be faced with something
familiar like a Cilops or Baazrag-headed giant, or with some exotic ancient
cryptid like a lion, tiger or bear. Oh my! Their skill at mind-reading is such
that they can copy most techniques used against them on the fly during a fight.

Beast Giants are fairly cosmopolitan sorts and frequently associate with other
types of giant and giant-kin who share their islands: hill giants, firbolgs,
brohgs, and others.

### Beast Giant

The typical beast giant is Large Natural Humanoid (Giant) and a Level 15 Brute
with 180 HP and a ground speed of 7 and Low-light Vision.

No matter what their head looks like, it gives them a **Rending Bite** that
deals heavy immediate damage and ongoing 5 damage (save ends). Once per
encounter they can use the **Red of Tooth** power to make three bite attacks on
the same action, each against a different target.

When someone attacks a beast giant, they can use **Psionic Retention** as a
reaction. They still suffer the damage and any riders normally, but they also
"retain" that result, so keep a note of it. They can then use this to power
their **Psionic Release** attack (melee 2 vs. Fortitude). A hit deals the exact
same amount and type of damage, and the exact same riders, as the giant's
"retained" attack. Psionic Release recharges when the giant uses Psionic
Retention again, so it effectively "spends" the retained attack.

### Beast Titan

The oldest Beast Giants have grown enough in power and size to qualify as Beast
Titans. They're a lot more aggressive than their younger counterparts and love
displaying the skulls of their enemies as trophies.

These are Huge instead of Large, and they're Level 20 Elite Brutes with 466
HP. Their ground speed is an 8, and their **Beast Reflexes** let them roll a
save to avoid falling prone.

Their Psionic Retention and Release powers work the same as the giant's, with
the greater range and numbers from their larger size and level. Their **Gnashing
Bite** is also upgraded.

As a minor action the titan can use **Titan's Embrace** (melee 3 vs. reflex) to
do some light damage and grab on a hit. And once it has a grabbed victim, it can
use **Head Rip** to deal massive damage, plus the same ongoing damage as the
bite. The giant also throws the victim 10 squares and knocks it prone at the
end.

## Shadow Giant

Unlike the Death Giants of the monster manual, who are merely death-_themed_,
Shadow Giants are actual undead. They're vengeful spirits who seek retribution
from an ancient slaughter, likely from the Red Age. They look like shadows cast
on a wall.

They tend to be loners, or to ally with those giants that still retain a strong
elemental connection (like fire and stone giants). Sometimes, a brohg renegade
will seek them out to learn the ancient arcane secrets the shadow still
rememebers.

Shadow Giants are Large Shadow Humanoids with the Undead and Giant tags, and
Level 18 Soldiers with 185 HP. They have darkvision, a ground speed of 7, and a
flight speed of 3. Like most undead, they are immune to disease and poison and
have 20 necrotic resistance. They're also insubstantial, but lack Phasing.

A shadow giant projects an aura (5) of **Shadow Malaise** that halves any
healing that takes place inside. Whenever they take radiant damage, they're
**Revealed by Radiance** and become substantial for a turn.
