---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Neverwinter: Overview and Protector's Enclave"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - neverwinter
---

Neverwinter is a coastal city-state built at the mouth of a river. There are
several stories about how it got that name, but the most popular one is that it
was from the warm waters of that river, which prevent the delta from freezing
during winter and so keep its port viable year-round.

A lot of present-day Neverwinter's national identity is based on the fabled
reign of Nasher Alagondar, a former adventure who became the city's ruler around
150 years ago. While some of the details were lost to time and to the
Spellplague, he was said to be a devout follower of Tyr, who was god of justice
in those days. Nasher never named himself king, though his descendants would
eventually accept the title and continue to rule the city well. Their line was
ostensibly unbroken until the cataclysm 27 years ago, when the last of them died
or vanished.

(Lord Nasher is the city's ruler during both Neverwinter Nights games, where
he's depicted as a very pragmatic True Neutral individual, so the view above is
somewhat romanticized.)

The cataclysm wrecked the city, opening a huge chasm that destroyed its
southeastern quadrant. Most of the citizens who didn't die left as refugees, and
only a minority of holdouts decided to stay and protect their ancestral
homes. They built a makeshift wall to isolate the Chasm and its monsters from
the rest of the city, and soon began to see its defense as a sacred duty.

Lord Neverember arrived nearly ten years ago at the head of an army of
carpenters and builders, protected by a mercenary force from Mintarn. Around
five years ago he established the Protector's Enclave, a sort of "green zone"
taking up the southwestern quadrant of the city, which he declared safe for
occupation. There were already people living all over the city, but the
establishment of the Enclave opened the way for refugees to return and for new
immigrants to come seeking new opportunities.

## The Enclave

The Enclave's infrastructure has been restored to pre-cataclysm levels. This
includes the port, which has once again begun to see trade from Waterdeep and
elsewhere. The variety of goods in its markets does a lot to make life in
Neverwinter easier.

Not all is roses in the Enclave, though. Neverember's government imposes a steep
tax on all commercial transactions, and the place is heavily policed by those
Mintarn mercenaries. The taxes are something one can get used to, but those
mercs have spies and goons stationed everywhere and love to employ all sorts of
excessive force against any perceived sign of dissent.

Neverember doesn't personally care about this police brutality, but he does make
an effort to keep it at a level that's beneath his notice, occasionally blaming
and punishing one of his underlings to get things to simmer back down for a
while.

The discontent aimed at New Neverwinter goes beyond just complaints about taxing
or policing, too. Those brave holdouts and their descendants are upset at the
"newcomer" who waltzed in and claimed credit for a lot of what they did over
those decades. Before Neverember arrived, it was them who kept the city
minimally habitable, and it was them who crewed the Wall that separates it from
the Chasm and its endless outpour of monsters. The Sons of Alagondar see him as
a foreign occupier and call him Lord Pretender. If your PCs want to brawl with a
guard patrol, saying those words within earshot of them is the best way to do
so.

### The Hall of Justice

This is a former temple of Tyr, the god of justice. Tyr was seen as the city's
patron deity until his death during the Spellplague, and its inhabitants refused
to convert the temple to serve another god even after that. If you played the
first Neverwinter Nights game you might recognize this as your quest hub during
Act 1. It sits atop a seaside bluff overlooking both the city and the sea.

Neverember chose it as his headquarters both because it had stayed mostly intact
after the cataclysm, and because Neverwinter's citizens still see it as an
important symbol of the city. He had it restored to its old splendor, and
sponsors a group of priests of Torm who regularly perform rituals following the
old Tyrran tradition here. While many people see this move in a positive light,
the Sons of Alagondar claim Neverember's presence defiles the temple and call it
the "Hall of Never-Justice".

Neverember himself lives in the former high priest's quarters, which he
decorated in the manner of Waterdeep while still taking care not to display that
city's coat-of-arms anywhere. He issues edicts and coordinates the high-level
policies of his government from his throne-room-like office, though he leaves
the day-to-day running of the city to Mayor Soman Galt and General Sabine (who
also take the blame for failed policies).

#### Player Tie-Ins

A text box here says Neverember will make a big show of befriending almost all
PCs when he first meets them. He will demonstrate interest in their goals but
won't actually do anything concrete to help unless doing so also advances his
own. He will also try to direct them towards tasks that do advance his goals,
and that initial friendship will quickly sour if the PCs prove uncooperative.

And of course, any PC with the Neverwinter Noble theme is very likely to enter
his shit list immediately.

### The Moonstone Mask

Another location that was important in the computer games, the Moonstone Mask
went through several changes in the intervening century. During the Spellplague,
the land around this fancy inn got turned into a floating earthmote, detaching
from the ground and floating away. The owners managed to lash it to the city's
port using ropes and enormous chains, and reopened for business boasting of the
new incredible view from its windows.

The place was mostly spared from the cataclysm but fell on hard times since
there was no one left who both wanted and could afford to patronize it. It
turned into a "festhall" (a brothel) in an attempt to draw more customers, but
eventually had to shut its doors.

A few years ago, a half-elf named Liset Cheldar arrived claiming to be a
returning native of the city and heir to the earthmote where the inn is located
(which was named the Moonstone). The claim was a little iffy but Neverember
still gave her ownership of the place and funded its reopening. Now Liset repays
the favor by housing a large number of Mintarn mercenaries. They take up most
rooms and a bunch of them can be found in the tavern part at all hours, dragging
the atmosphere down and picking fights with non-merc patrons.

The book suggests making Liset the puppet of one of the other factions, but I
think that's a bit too cliche to make the pretty and flirty woman a secret
monster. The inn is already dangerous enough with all the mercs in it.


### The Wall

The Wall was built by Neverwinter's holdouts after the cataclysm. It separates
the southwestern quadrant of the city from the Chasm in the SE
quadrant. It was initially built from rubble and barricaded buildings, and
manned by martially-inclined survivors. In time, guarding the Wall came to be
seen as a sacred duty.

When Neverember arrived, he reinforced the Wall with proper defensive
architecture and assigned a significant chunk of his mercenaries to supplement
the survivor garrison.

Together with Neverwinter River, the Wall has been effective at preventing any
plaguechanged horrors from leaving the area of the Chasm, but recently some of
them have been spotted north of the river and near sewer entrances. Mayor Galt
fields several daily petitions for expanding the Wall further.

Guarding the Wall and repelling plaguechanged assaults is one of the quickest
ways to win the hearts and minds of the city's inhabitants. The increasing
fiction between the mercs who make up most of the guard forces and the hardened
native veterans who refuse to abandon their sacred duty can also be a source of
many plot hooks.

### The House of Knowledge

This used to be a great temple to Oghma, occupying what is now the northeast end
of the Wall. After the cataclysm, the elderly Brother Anthus became its head
priest for a while, and they dedicated themselves to studying the plaguechanged
creatures that emerged from it. When Anthus died under mysterious circumstances,
the priestess Rohini took over and moved their whole operation to Helm's Hold.

(To know the truth about those mysterious circumstances, check Rohini's bio).

A single volunteer priest remained behind to look after the temple's extensive
library and archive, Brother Atlavast. Long years of solitude and isolation have
made the priest a paranoid eccentric. He keeps to the lower levels underground
and I don't think a lot of people even remember he's there.

By default, Atlavast is ornery but not evil. He'll be very happy to see Oghma's
Faithful, for example, though he will insist on testing them and any other PCs
to see if they're worthy of the archives. If they do manage to befriend him, he
can be a great help when exploring the library. Optionally, he might be in
thrall to the aboleths (like the rest of the priests over at Helm's Hold), but
it should be possible to free and redeem him.

The surface levels of the temple, long abandoned, have been taken over by a
group of squatters which decided to make themselves useful by serving as
lookouts on the Wall and ringing the temple's bells when they see monsters. The
mercs often leave them gifts of food and clothing, and are becoming fast friends
with them... unaware that the squatters are all undercover Ashmadai
cultists. They already managed to get one of the Mintarn captains possessed by a
devil.

### Neverdeath

This huge graveyard was in use for centuries until the cataclysm, when the vast
expanse of graves and mausoleums was wracked by tremors. Some sections of it
sunk, others rose up as cliffs, and all of this exposed graves and underground
crypts, causing coffins and bones to tumble about.

The current inhabitants of the city fear this place. The Mintarn mercs burn dead
bodies outside the city walls instead of burying them here. It's not uncommon
for unburied bodies on or near the cemetery to rise as undead of their own
accord.

It doesn't help that the Thayans have a major base in here, and are using it as
major source of bodies for reanimation. The place also contains a shadow
crossing into Evernight, and Valindra has built a teleportation circle here to
make use of it.

The Netherese are aware of the shadow crossing and one of their goals is to
destroy it or otherwise deny it to Valindra. They want to be discreet about it,
though, and don't want to jeopardize their project to raise Xinlenal.

#### Waterclock Crypts

Neverwinter was once known for the amazing quality of its water clocks. The
guild responsible for making them built this crypt to inter its dead. It's
filled with clever traps and engines using water clock technology and elemental
magic. Hidden here is the laboratory of its founder, who first arrived in the
city coming from Luskan with a cartload of stolen magic knowledge. Among that
knowledge are notes on the original ritual that bound Maegera.

A vein of elemental magic runs through the crypt and provides a link between
Luskan and Gauntlgrym. Following it could be one way in which the PCs find the
lost city. Of course, they need to get through all the undead and Thayans up
above, as well as whatever defenses this place has.

### The Docks

Rebuilding the docks was one of Neverember's greatest priorities. Trade with the
rest of the world has resumed, and the lord makes a pretty penny charging
tariffs on it. There's lots of crime and corruption here as well, but I get the
feeling Neverember only cares about it to the extend that it impedes trade.

Also here is the Tarmalune Trade House, belonging to a merchant guild from
Returned Abeir (the new continent a ways off to the northwest of
Neverwinter). They're in need of adventurers for all sorts of traditional quests
without many ties to the campaign's larger plots, and would just love to
befriend any PCs that have strong ties to Waterdeep, since that could give them
an way into that city's markets.
