---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Drow"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

We first looked at Drow during our [Let's Read of the Monster Manual and
Vault][1], and you can read that post by clicking the link. The basic lore of
the drow remains the same, and this entry adds a bit more alongside some
epic-tier drow enemies.

## The Lore

Mainstream Lolth-worshipping drow society is a nightmare of intrigue and
backstabbing, as we have already seen. Every drow is plotting to backstab their
superiors while keeping an eye out for similar plots coming from their
subordinates and peers. The higher they rise, the more favor they have in the
eyes of Lolth. Where does it end, though? What reward awaits those followers who
become such tracherous vermin they become one of Lolth's favorite children?

Why, they get to go live in the Demonweb and do it all over again!

Abyssal drow make up the bulk of the non-demon population of the Demonweb. The
broad outlines of their society are largely the same as those in the world -
they organize themselves into a number of factions that struggle for dominance
and Lolth's personal favor. There are three important differences, however.

The first is that these abyssal factions are centered around powerful and
charismatic individuals rather than around a city-state or noble house. The
second is that they're made up of a mix of abyssal drows and demons of various
kinds. The third and most surprising difference is that there is almost no
_internal_ intrigue within these factions. The stakes in the Abyss are too
high - Abyssal drow form stable alliances because they can't afford to backstab
their allies down here.

The leaders of these factions are usually Lolth's Exarchs, and they occupy the
highest position any mortal worshiper of Lolth can aspire to. When in the Abyss,
they spend their time managing their faction and its intrigues against the
others. When outside the Demonweb, they tend to infiltrate other sapient
cultures or even act as overt ambassadors of Lolth within them. Examples of such
culture includes the giants and efreets of the Elemental Chaos or the devils of
Hell.

## The Monsters

Abyssal drow are still drow: Medium Fey Humanoids with a Speed of 7 and
Darkvision. Everything else about them is a function of training and varies per
stat block. Not even the classic Darkfire power is a constant, though it still
shows up in some individuals.

### Drow Zealot

Zealots are terrifying epic level warriors, but among the drow of the Abyss
they're considered the rank and file, the lowest of the low. Most arrived from
the world not too long ago, their minds filled with dreams of glorious
purpose. Some are instead long-term residents of the Abyss who have been busted
down to zealot from some loftier rank due to some mistake or act of
disobedience.

In either case, the first thing Lolth does to a drow who attains this rank is to
curse them with a demonic spider infestation. The constant pain and suffering
this causes serves as a powerful incentive for zealots to strive for
promotion. The spiders that crawl out of their orifices and wounds also provide
some occasional help in combat, as they attack the drow's enemies.

Zealots are Level 23 Brutes with 265 HP. They have Resist 10 poison and the
usual drow traits. They fight with a Fullblade, a huge two-handed sword that
appeared in one of the Adventurer's Vault supplements.

While bloodied they project a **Spider Host** aura (1), which causes any enemy
in the aura that becomes bloodied to take 20 ongoing poison damage (save ends)
as the demon spiders crawl from the zealot's bloodstream to the enemy's.

Their **fullblades** do the heavy damage you'd expect from an epic brute, and if
the zealot misses with the attack it gains a +2 to attacks and a +5 to damage
against the same target until the end of its next turn.

Zealots have the traditional **Darkfire** ability, a minor-action encounter
power that targets Reflex. It makes the target grant combat advantage and
nullifies any invisibility or concealment for a turn.

When the zealot reaches 0 HP, it explodes in a **Spider Burst**, creating a
Close Burst 1 zone that lasts until the end of the encounter and causes 10
poison damage to anyone that starts their turn inside.

Other zealots are immune to the zone's damage due to their poison resistance, so
they have no trouble stepping over the burst corpses of their allies. They'll
charge the PCs and hack away without much care for their own wounds, since their
auras kick in when they're bloodied. They pair well with Leader enemies that
grant extra attacks, since those could allow them to benefit from the damage
bonus given by a missed attack more than once.

## Draegloth Abomination

Abyssal drow often summon, bind, and otherwise ally with demons, but some
priestesses go further and make their own. Draegloths are created by abyssal
magic from a mix of demon and drider DNA.

Draegloths are pretty much impossible to control, which isn't usually a very
desired trait in lab-bred monsters. Because of this their creation is usually
done as an act of devotion to Lolth, and they're gifted directly to the goddess,
to whom they are quite loyal. They can be found patrolling the Demonweb
alongside other Lolth-favored demons.

Draegloth Abominations are Huge Elemental Magical Beasts with the Demon
tag. They look like elephant-sized driders, or like the dapper fellow here in
the illustration. They're Level 24 Lurkers with 174 HP, ground and climb speeds
of 8, Darkvision, and Tremorsense 10.

Their basic attack is a **Claw** that does double damage against a dazed
creature. The **Slashing Claws** ability allows them to make two claw attacks
with the same action. Their other attack is a **Tethering Web** (ranged 5
vs. Reflex). A hit does a small bit of poison damage and tethers the target
(save ends). Tethered targets are dazed, and the demon can pull them adjacent to
itself with a free action.

Once per encounter they can use a power named **Maddening Darkness**. This
attacks the Will of all enemies in a Close Burst 2. On a hit, it slows and dazes
for a turn. This power also creates a zone of darkness that blocks line of sight
and blinds those within (with the exception of the demon in both cases). The
zone also lasts for a turn.

When damaged, the draegloth can use a **Dark Leap** as a reaction. This is
another encounter power, and it recharges when it's first bloodied. It allows
the creature to immediately recharge and use Maddening Darkness, and then
teleport 8 squares.

Finally, it has top-tier Variable Resistance (Resistance 20 switchable
3/encounter).

Draegloths want to strike from ambush and open up with Maddening
Darkness. They'll claw as many dazed PCs as they can, and use Dark Leap with the
PCs begin counter-attacking. From what point on they'll try to stay away and
tether the squishies.

### Drow Shadowblade

Lolth delights in treachery, even between her own followers. So when a drow
assassin is skilled and resourceful enough to murder one of the priestesses that
rule the drow city-states, that assassin gets invited to the Abyss and becomes a
Shadowblade. These epic assassins have access to the best gear, the deadliest
poisons, and to a special technique that lets them animate and control their own
shadow.

Shadowblades are Level 24 Lurkers with 171 HP and the usual drow
Darkvision. Their ground speed is 7 and they have phasing, which means they can
walk through walls.

Their basic attack is a **Short Sword**. Instead of attacking, they can spend
their action to cast **Animated Shadow**, creating an allied animated shadow
within 10 squares. The shadow lasts until the end of the shadowblade's next
turn and counts as an ally for flanking purposes, but is immune to attacks. When
the shadowblade moves on its turn, the shadow slides an equal number of squares.

When a target is flanked by both the shadowblade and its shadow, the assassin
can use a **Shadow Strike** that deals the same damage as a basic attack plus 10
necrotic damage. This causes the shadow to burst into a zone of blinding
darkness to which the drow itself is immune. It lasts for a turn.

As a minor action, the shadowblade can poison its weapon with **Soulrot Venom**,
which adds a complicated rider to the next attack it hits before the end of the
encounter. That hit will weaken the target (save ends). The first failed save
also makes the target take 15 ongoing necrotic damage; the second strips it of
all resistances and immunities! A successful save ends all those effects. The
venom recharges once the shadowblade is first bloodied.

Finally, its mastery of the sword manifests as the **Persistent Blade** power
(recharge 4+). This is a free action that triggers when the shadowblade misses
with its sword, and it allows it to make a basic attack against a different
enemy.

A shadowblade alpha strike is kinda scary. It summons the shadow and envenoms
its weapon "off-screen", and then flanks and stabs a PC through a wall. If this
hits, the PC will take damage from the sword, bonus necrotic damage from the
shadow, and will be subject to soulrot venom. If this misses, the shadowblade
can still stab someone else and poison them as a consolation prize. As soon as
it can move again, it will fade into the wall and get ready for another shadow
strike.

### Drow Archmage

A drow wizard powerful enough to be invited to live in the Demonweb, where they
give themselves over to the Abyss and become rather warlock-like. Despite their
demonic power, these spellcasters fear for their souls, which become fair game
to their demon buddies if they die. They are quick to run away from a fight if
it seems like they're losing, abandoning their thralls and allies to their fate.

Archmages are Level 25 Artillery with 178 HP and the standard drow traits. They
fight in melee with **Daggers** that do physical damage and inflict a -4 attack
penalty for a turn; and at range with **Abyssal Bolts** (ranged 20 vs. Reflex)
that do acid and poison damage. They can also use two encounter spells that
target Fortitude.

**Cruel Banishing** (melee 1) does no damage, but teleports the target 7 squares
and dazes them (save ends). This is a lot deadlier if there draegoloths on Team
Monster!

**Demonic Grasp** (ranged 10) immobilizes the target and suspends them 1 square
up. Immobilized targets can still fight, they just can't move. However, while
the target is affected by this spell, they take 10 poison damage every time they
_or their allies_ damage a demon, drow, or spider.

As a minor action, the archmage can perform an **Unwholesome Sacrifice**
(recharge 5+), dealing 20 damage to an adjacent ally in order to either recharge
an encounter power or get a +10 damage bonus to a ranged attack made before the
end of its next turn. Finally, it also has the same **Darkfire** power as the
zealot.

### Drow Exalted Consort

Drow society is matriarchal, and though plenty of career paths are open to drow
men the loftiest heights of power are usually denied to them. The only way for a
drow male to be part of the real elite is to become consort to a powerful
priestess.

Being a consort is about more than looking pretty - they're also expected to
serve their ladies as bodyguards and knights. This practice continues in the
Abyss, where Exalted Consorts are hand-picked by Lolth herself for their beauty
and martial skill. She imbues them with divine power, and places them under the
service of her priestesses in the Demonweb. This means Exalted Consorts are
kinda like epic paladins or avengers of Lolth. I guess a gift of new consorts is
a sign that Lolth particularly favors that priestess today.

Exalted Consorts are Level 25 Skirmishers with 224 HP. They wield paired
**longswords** in combat with a graceful, mobile fighting style. Aside from
basic attacks, they can use an at-will technique named **Warding Blades** that
does nearly double the damage of a basic attack and gives them a +6 AC bonus
against opportunity attacks for a turn. This allows them to move around the
battlefield much more freely than most enemies.

They have another technique named **Blurred Steel** that allows them to make
three basic attacks in the same action. Up to two of which can target the same
creature, and the power recharges when the consort moves more than 3 squares in
its turn. This is a good move to alternate with Warding Blades in order to
spread damage around.

Lolth's power turns the standard drow Darkfire into an attack named **Darkfire
Revelation**, a minor action which targets Reflex and deals fire damage. A hit
nullifies invisibility and concealment for a (save ends) duration, longer than
the single turn of basic Darkfire. This is an encounter power.

Their last encounter power is **Lolth's Favor**, which triggers when the consort
becomes bloodied. As a reaction, they teleport 7 squares, and cause all enemies
adjacent to them at the destination to grant combat advantage for a turn. This
is not an escape power, but something used to press the attack.

Warding Blades should be the consort's attack of choice even when it doesn't
plan on moving much, the extra damage is too good to pass up. Blurring Steel is
a good alternative for when the consort manages to run or teleport past the PC
front line and close in on the poorly-armored squishies at the back, followed by
more Warding Blades in subsequent turns.

### Drow Lady of Spiders

"Lady of Spiders" is the second-highest rank in Lolth's priesthood. There are
only sixty-six of these in all of existence, and the only way to ascend to their
ranks is to kill one of the incumbents. The only drow who outranks them is
Eclavdra, Lolth's main exarch.

A Lady of Spiders will always be found commanding a sizable force of drow,
demons and spiders of similar level. Her commands and her magic act as a big
force multiplier for her lackeys. Her powers include a lot of poison- and
mind-based magic, as well as the ability to heal allies and to summon demonic
spiders.

Such a Lady is a Level 27 Elite Controller with 494 HP. She projects **Lolth's
Blessing** as an aura (2) that heals bloodied allies inside for 10 HP at the
start of their turns. However, she's **Sensitive to Light**, which causes the
aura to shut down for a turn if the Lady takes radiant damage.

Her basic melee attack is a **scourge** that damages and slides enemies 2
squares on a hit, and her basic ranged attack **Conjures Venom** straight into a
victim's bloodstream to deal poison damage.

She can also cast an at-will spell to summon **Coccooning Webs** around a
target, restraining them and dealing ongoing 25 poison damage (save ends
both). I think we just broke the record for most ongoing poison damage in an MM
so far, unless someone else reached 30 and I forgot. A target who makes the save
is still slowed until they pass a second one.

The Lady's mind magic is represented by **Irrefutable Command** (recharge 5+), a
Close Burst 3 that targets up to 2 creatures in the burst. Targets must choose
between charging another creature of the Lady's choice or taking 50 psychic
damage.

I'd say her signature ability is **Bring Forth the Widows**, though. It takes a
standard action and summons a Medium demonic shadow spider to a space within 10
squares of the priestess. The Widow has 100 HP and the Lady's defenses. It also
has speed 8 (spider climb 8), and moves whenever the Lady takes a move
action. It stays in the field for the rest of the fight or until destroyed, and
if it's destroyed this power recharges.

The Lady can order the Widow to attack with a minor action, and this deals
physical and ongoing poison damage. The spider can also make opportunity attacks
using the Lady's opportunity action.

When the lady is hit in melee, her **Fearsome Wrath** attacks the Will of all
enemies in a close burst 5. On a hit they're pushed 5 squares and stunned for a
turn. This fear effect recharges once the Lady is first bloodied.

## Final Impression

With this and the Lolth entry that we'll find a further into the book
(spoilers!), you have everything you need to run a 4e rendition of the GDQ
module series. Abyssal drow are the sort of enemy you'll find in the Demonweb
itself, and their unique abilities give you a spicier result than what you'd get
if you just used leveled-up MV drow.

You don't have to change much of their lore even if non-evil drow are common in
your setting. These are the people who chose to dedicate themselves to Lolth,
goddess of betrayal, mistress of the cycle of abuse, etc. etc.


[1]: https://bira.github.io/octopus-carnival/2020/02/02/drow.html
