---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Dark Sun Creature Catalog: Id Fiend"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
    - dark-sun
---

## The Lore

Id fiends are big toothy lizards with psionic powers of fear manipulation,
which they use to hunt their preferred prey. Which is, of course, people.

As reasonably smart magical beasts, they are capable of making alliances with
other creatures, though these tend to be strained at best. More often, an id
fiend might craft fearful illusions to manipulate those creatures into helping
it attack others. When that happens, the best tactic is to focus on the id
fiend - when it does, its control ends.

Id fiends are a major threat to civilians, but a favorite target of seasoned
monster hunters. The House of the Mind in Draj pays generously for live
specimens, whose fresh organs and fluids go into making alchemical potions meant
to awaken someone's psychic potential. Many of those are dubious at best, but at
least some of them have real effects. The book mentions "terror ichor" by name -
this is a consumable reagent that can be used to enhance fear-based powers.

## The Numbers

If Fiends are Large Aberrant Magical Beasts with the Reptile tag. This probably
makes them the most mundane-looking aberrants we saw so far. Just a big lizard,
not a tentacle in sight.

Mechanically, they end up filling the empty niche left by absence of low-level
dragons in Athas. They're Level 1 Solo Controllers with 120 HP, Darkvision, a
Speed of 6, an immunity to Fear and Resist 5 Psychic.

A fiend can attack with a **quick slash** of its claws, which deals light
physical damage and lets it shift 1 square; with a bite of its **Snapping Jaws**
that deals more damage and slides the target 1 square; or with a **Double
Attack** that uses both.

Instead of a breath weapon, it has the **Manifest Fear** power (recharge 4+),
which affects enemies in a Close Burst 5. Those hit by it are dazed for a turn
as they see a vision of their worst fears becoming reality.

Once the fiend dazes a few enemies, it will use the **Fearful Torment** power, a
minor-action ranged attack that targets one or two tazed creatures. A hit deals
psychic damage, immobilizes, and inflicts a -2 penalty to attacks for a turn. I
guess this means it makes the vision of fear worse.

Once the fiend is first bloodied, Manifest Fear recharges and it can use the
power immediately as a free action.

Looks like id fiends prefer to use their fear powers to kill their victims if
possible, though they're also perfectly capable of physical fighting as seen
above.

## Encounters and Final Impressions

A single id fiend makes a fine boss battle for beginner PCs. Once they gain a
level or two, you can begin to add thralls enraptured by visions of fear, and
fooled into thinking the PCs are monsters to be slain. As the book says, killing
the fiend will likely free the thralls.

It's an interesting monster, I think. Effectively a low-level dragon that
breathes fear. You can level it up a bit to make it more challenging for
mid-Heroic PCs, but I'd probably set that as the upper bound of their power.
