---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Choker"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Chokers are humanoid creatures with somewhat elongated heads and very long
rubbery arms ending in hands whose palms seem lined with sharp barbs. To better
choke you with, obviously. They're only listed in the Monster Manual.

There's not much choker lore here. Chokers like to ambush people to choke them
and loot the bodies. Their arms are so flexible because their internal structure
is composed of many knobby cartilage joints. Sometimes other humanoids will hire
them as assassins or sentries and pay with food and treasure.

We have two varieties of choker statted up here, both Unaligned and possessed of
Int 6. I suppose this could mean not every choker the party meets is a bandit,
but I don't think I ever saw any published friendly chokers.

The first variety is the **Cavern Choker**, who is a Small Natural Humanoid and
a Level 4 Lurker with 42 HP. It has darkvision, a ground speed of 6, and a climb
speed of 6 with spider climb.

Its basic (and main) attack is the Tentacle Claw. Its Reach 2 is impressive for
a Small creature, and in addition to doing damage it also automatically grabs
the target on a hit. Grabs in 4e prevent the victim from moving, but not from
performing other actions. They can use an action to attempt to escape the
grab. For monsters without a listed escape DC, such as these chokers, the test
is either the victims Acrobatics vs. the monster's Reflex, or Athletics vs. the
monster's Fortitude. In this specific case the target takes a -4 penalty to the
roll to escape.

Some monsters have specific things they can do to grabbed victims. For example,
the cavern choker can use its standard action to choke a grabbed victim, an
attack which deals the same damage as the claw but targets Fortitude and has a
better chance of landing. When the choker is targeted by an attack against its
AC or Reflex, it can use an immediate interrupt to interpose the grabbed victim,
causing the attack to target _them_ instead. This doesn't work if the attack
comes from the victim itself, obviously.

The choker also has a Chameleon Hide, which it can activate as a minor action to
gain concealment for a turn. It can't use this while grabbing someone, but it's
useful for it to retreat using its considerable Stealth.

The tactics write themselves - the choker will lurk on a ceiling and grab
someone when they pass by, while its less sneaky buddies distract the rest of
the party.

The other variety here is the **Feygrove Choker**, a Medium Fey Humanoid who's a
Level 12 Lurker with 91 HP. A different species, or the platonic ideal of the
mundane choker? In any case its abilities are quite similar. It has Reach 3 and
can grab up to 2 targets simultaneously. When it has 2 grabbed creatures it can
choke them both at once; it can use either creature as a shield, but not against
attacks made by either grabbed creature.

As an extra surprise, it can use a power named Vine Fetter, which animates
nearby vegetation in an Area Burst 3 within 10 squares. It targets the Reflex of
enemies in the area and restrains them (save ends) on a hit. This recharges on a
6 and will very likely be the opening move in a fight.

The sample encounter is level 4: a pair of cavern chokers employed by a small
hobgoblin war party.

Chokers get a "meh" from me. I didn't find them that exciting. I guess they're
the sort of gimmicky Gygaxian monster you'd expect to find alongside cloakers
and piercers, but I didn't find them appealing outside of that.
