---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Nerra"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

This is the first I've heard of Nerras, though it's possible they originated in
a previous edition. If they did, their lore was completely different.

## The Lore

Many ages ago, a sect of mortal invokers called the Sect of Seventy came to
believe that the gods had grown too detached from the middle world in the
aftermath of the Dawn War. They had become incapable of defending it from the
many threats and hazards that lingered from those terrible battles.

The Sect of Seventy decided to claim for themselves the role of protectors of
the middle world, and set about building a grand work that would allow them to
keep watch over all reality. They used their divine magic to build an astral
dominion they named The Constellation of Eyes. Located far from all the other
known dominions, it consisted of a central reflective crystal sphere around
which orbited uncountable mirrors that reflected different parts of the universe
and could be used as portals to reach those places.

In other words, the Constellation is the ultimate panopticon, capable of
maintaining surveillance over the entire universe and allowing its owners to
instantly deploy to places of interest. The Sect intended it to be the perfect
"superhero base" from which they would keep watch over reality, but other
interested parties had far more nefarious uses in mind.

The Sect was unknowingly infiltrated by a small group of priests of Asmodeus,
who intended to seize it for themselves and use it to open a permanent portal to
the Nine Hells that would give devils free access to the rest of the
multiverse. The invokers only managed to discover this after the final ritual
had already began. The ensuing battle was every bit as epic as you imagine, and
the resulting flare of divine energy from both sides was strong enough for the
other gods to notice and send their angels to investigate.

The angels would have been a great help, but they arrived too late. As far as
they were able to determine, the invokers realized they were losing the battle,
and enacted a desperate ritual of their own that would bring terrible ruin upon
all that were in the Constellation of Eyes. The ritual worked. It turned both
the invokers and the Asmodean priests into the creatures now known as Nerras.

These mirrored crystaline humanoids still dwell in the Constellation of
Eyes. With no apparent memory of their previous lives, they spent the following
eons acting as dispassionate observers of the multiverse. Their observations are
recorded in specially constructed glass tablets that can only be read from a
slanted angle, and their collected store of information is one of the greatest
in existence.

Relatively recently, though, the nerras have changed their behavior and become
more proactive. They've taken to crossing their mirror portals and kidnapping
certain powerful and influential individuals. Back at the Constellation, the
nerras use their magic to create a perfect duplicate of the subject, with a
diametrically opposite moral outlook. Then they send both back home. This
predictably causes a lot of problems.

Nerras target both terrible villains and virtuous heroes in equal measure. Those
scholars aware of their history theorize that ancient memories of the nerras'
former lives are resurfacing and causing divisions among them, and that their
new activities are an experiment to see which between good and evil is stronger.

Nerras also travel to places they consider interesting to monitor things from up
close, and sometime they interfere in local events for inscrutable
reasons. Sometimes their interference ends up causing wars and disasters, some
times they prevent them.

Nerras despise demons, devils, and creatures of the Far Realm, but they ally
with other creatures when their goals happen to align. Even their occasional
allies have little insight on their true motives, which they keep to themselves.

## The Numbers

Nerra are Medium Immortal Humanoids, with Speed 6 and human-standard
senses. Their signature ability is **Mirror Step**, an at-will move action that
allows them to teleport 5 squares to a space adjacent to a mirror or to another
nerra. This means a group of nerras finds it very easy to maintain a cohesive
formation, and that their preferred battlegrounds have lots of mirrors that they
can use for extra mobility. All of the ones we see here are Unaligned, and they
speak Supernal.

All of their other abilities vary per stat block, though they all tend to share
a strong "mirror" theme. Their levels cover the mid-to-late Paragon tier.

### Varoot Nerra

Varoots are elite scouts and spies. They're the first to venture forth from the
Constellation of Eyes to lay the groundwork for a nerra expedition. Their
ability to copy the appearances of others makes them great infiltrators.

Varoot Nerras are Level 16 Lurkers with the Shapechanger keyword and 116
HP. Their main weapon is a **shard blade** similar to a longsword. Their
**Reflection Theft** ability allows them to perfectly duplicate an enemy within
10 squares of it. The effect lasts until the end of the encounter, or until the
varoot attacks. If the varoot is adjacent to the copying enemy, it gets to roll
a save against any melee or ranged attack that targets it, with a success
forcing the attack to target the copied enemy instead. It also gains a +2 bonus
to attack and a +5 bonus to damage against the copied enemy.

Its last ability aside from Mirror Step is **Mirrored Grasp**, a minor-action
power that lets the nerra teleport an unattended object of up to 20 pounds /
10kg that's within 10 squares and line of sight to its hand.

In combat, the Varoot does it's Lurker routine by "hiding" next to a PC it's
copying, attacking the copied PC with a damage bonus, and teleporting away using
Mirror Step so it can transform and try again.

There's no way to pierce the varoot's disguise with a skill check, at least in
the ability's combat form. It would make sense to rule that outside of combat
this works like a doppelganger's transformation: it lasts a long time and can be
contested with Insight vs. the nerra's Bluff of +20.

### Meerak Nerra

Meeraks are the rank and file of a Nerra strike force. They charge into the
enemy to cut it up with their spiked, jagged bodies, softening them up for the
more powerful individuals that always follow close behind them.

Meeraks are Level 18 Minion Soldiers. Their **Mirror Slash** basic attacks mark
on a hit, and their **Mirror Defense** ability is an interrupt that triggers
when they're hit by a melee attack and deals 10 damage to a different enemy
within 10 squares. The meerak is still going to die from the hit, but not before
reflecting some damage to a PC.

### Kalareem Nerra

Kalareems are elite knights among the nerra. Unlike a lot of their crystalline
relatives, they look like they're made out of mirror-smooth liquid metal. This
makes them hard to hurt, and they can also briefly solidify parts of their
bodies to launch a spray of deadly metal shards.

Kalareem Nerras are Level 19 Soldiers with 175 HP. Their liquid metal
construction doesn't translate to specific abilities but it's a nice
in-character explanation for the high defenses and HP a level 19 Soldier
has. Their basic attack is a **Shard Blade** that damages and marks on a hit, as
do the **Shard Blasts** they can fire at-will in a Close Burst 3 pattern.

Aside from the standard nerra Mirror Step, they also have two other
mirror-themed abilities that make them good bodyguards. **Mirror Image** is an
interrupt that triggers when a marked enemy makes a melee or ranged attack that
doesn't include the nerra as a target. It makes the enemy target the nerra
instead. **Mirror Defense** is another interrupt that triggers when the kalareem
is hit by a melee attack. The creature can then make an attack against the Will
of the triggering enemy, which on a hit deals the same damage inflicted by the
triggering attack. This is an interrupt, so the attacker gets damaged _before_
the nerra, and if they get reduced to 0 HP the kalareem wouldn't suffer the
damage.

### Sillit Nerra

Sillits are nerra spellcasters, who often act as field agents and
mystically-oriented scouts. Like other spellcasting monsters, out of combat they
should have access to whatever rituals are required by the story. In combat,
they use mirror-themed spells and specialize in forcibly teleporting enemies.

Sillits are Level 19 Controllers with 181 HP. Even their basic attack is a
**Mirror Portal** that targets Will, and on a hit damages and teleports the
target adjacent to one of the sillit's allies within 10 squares. Their basic
ranged attack is **Warped Image**, which targets Fortitude and on a hit damages
and teleports the target 3 squares.

Their special attack is **Captured Image** (recharge 5+), a ranged power that
targets Will. On a hit it removes the target from play (save ends), trapping it
within the mirrors that make up the sillit's body. While the target is captured,
it takes 20 damage whenever the sillit is damaged. The effect ends when the
target successfully saves, or when the sillit is reduced to 0 HP. When this
happens the target appears on a square of the sillit's choice within 5 squares
of the sillit itself. Yes, it's entirely possible that a sillit who gets lucky
with its recharge rolls will manage to capture multiple targets at the same
time.

Sillits have the standard Mirror Step power, and the same Mirrored Grasp power
of the Varoots.

Judging from their powers, Sillits love to fight in maps containing plenty of
hazardous terrain, and accompanied by bruiser allies. They'll use Captured Image
as soon and as often as they can, and then move to the front lines to dare PCs
to attack them. Inconveniently strong melee PCs can be teleported next to the
bruisers with Mirror Portal, and Warped Image is good for disrupting the
remaining PCs if no other opportunities arise. Hazardous terrain on the
battlefield makes those forced teleports more dangerous.

### Delphar Nerra

Delphars are the officers and commanders of nerra forces. They're similar to
kalareems in their training, but they're much larger and their mere presence has
bolstering effects on the abilities of their allies.

Unlike other nerra, delphars are Large and have Speed 8. They're Level 20
Soldiers with 187 HP and the Leader tag. They project a **Mirrored Rampart**
aura (5) that extends the range of other nerras' Mirror Step to 10. They fight
with a **Shard Blade** and **Shard Blasts** that have the same effects as those
of kalareems, with slightly higher numbers.

They have a different way of punishing marked enemies, though: **Mirrored
Grasp** triggers when a marked enemy within 10 squares ignores the mark, and
teleports the enemy adjacent to the delphar.

### Teltarym Nerra

You would expect the strongest monster in the entry to be some sort of dread
overlord, but we're talking about topsy-turvy mirror people here. Teltarym are
the nerra's manual laborers, joining the fight either because they must defend
themselves or because they were ordered to. Despite not being formal combatants
they're very strong and aggressive, charging in to smash enemies with their huge
fists, and reflecting their own wounds back at their attackers.

Teltarym are Level 21 Brutes with 237 HP. Like delphars, they're Large and have
Speed 8. Their basic attack is a **Hammer Fist** that damages and pushes 1
square, and they can use it twice in the same action. **Reflected Pain** is a
reaction that triggers when they're hit by a melee attack, and which inflicts
half the damage they suffered to the attacker. This recharges when they're first
bloodied. Their last ability is Mirror Step, so like most brutes they're fairly
simple to run.

These are the perfect bruiser allies for Sillits!

## Final Impressions

I like the lore of the nerra quite a lot. It's nice and epic and introduces a
new and interesting location on the Astral Sea. I also like how they're depicted
as enigmatic instead of evil. A campaign against nerra is one where violence
might be necessary to drive them off, but where true victory can only be
achieved through unraveling their mysteries.

Mechanics wise it seems varoots are a bit too low level to hang out with their
nerra buddies, so you're going to meet them alone at the start of a
nerra-focused story arc. They might be accompanied by local agents or
mecernaries. The others are all of a level range where you can use them to build
all-nerra encounter groups.
