---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Devil, Corruption"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Remember when I told you the MM3 had the very good idea of giving each devil and
demon its own entry rather than lumping them all together? Here's where they
kinda toss that out the window and make a big entry full of diverse stat blocks
for a single type of devil.

Corruption Devils, or Paeliryons, first appeared in one of the later Monster
Manuals for 3rd Edition. I remember they were not very well-received because
their lore and appearance had some quite unfortunate implications. This book is
still making an effort to make them a big part of the game, so let's see if the
lore improved in any way.

## The Lore

The book describes these devils as "bloated infernal masterminds of graft,
sleaze, and vice". They're better at politics and intrigue than almost anyone
else in Hell, and they put that skill to use in subverting mortal societies to
their benefit, turning them into decadent kleptocracies via a network of agents
and dupes. Most paeliryons work for Dispater, lord of the second layer of Hell,
acting as the civil administration of that wretched city.

A corruption devil's agent network is somewhat inverted from what you'd
expect. Its most powerful members are kept at a safe remove from the devil,
while those that work directly with it are ignorant sycophants and expendable
muscle.

I see that they kept the Paeliryion illustration from the previous edition, but
if I'm remembering it correctly the lore was changed to something a little less
problematic. With an extra decade of hindsight, I'd probably replace the Ursula
cosplay with a big suit and an orange wig.

## The Monsters

### Corruption Devil

The basic model, depicted in the illustration. These are most likely to be found
running the city of Dis, but can also go out into the other planes to perform
specific missions. Though physically imposing, the creatures prefer to avoid
direct conflicts, and will try to negotiate their way out of trouble. If forced
into combat they fight like PC bards, staying away from the melee and hurling
magically-charged insults and mind control spells at their enemies.

They pal around with other manipulative devils such as succubi, vizier devils,
and cambions, though these are almost always pawns rather than full allies. If
things see to be going bad for it, the paeliryion will definitely fly away and
abandon its "friends".

Corruption Devils are Large Immortal Humanoids (Devils), and Level 22
Controllers (Leaders) with 208 HP. They have Darkvision and a +5 to save against
fear and charm effects. Their ground speed is only 4, but they're excellent
fliers with speed 6 (hover).

These devils project a **Corruptive Presence** that works as an aura (5) and
inflicts a -2 penalty to saves on all enemies inside its radius. It fights in
melee with **Corrupting Claws** and at range with **Words of Corruption**, both
of which deal no immediate damage and instead inflict ongoing psychic damage
(save ends).

Their mind control magic takes the form of two minor-action spells. **Sway the
Corrupt** (at-will) targets an enemy that's taking ongoing psychic damage. It
hits automatically, and dominates them for a turn. **Doom the Corrupt**
(recharge 5+) targets an ally or a dominated creature, forcing them to make a
melee basic attack against an enemy of the devil's choice. If that attack hits,
its target is also immobilized (save ends).

Finally, it can use **Desperate Measures** as a minor action to allow an ally to
make a basic attack that crits on 19-20, in exchange for the ally granting
combat advantage for a turn. This recharges when the devil is first bloodied,
and if used while it's bloodied it applies to every ally within 5 squares
instead of just one.

### Sire of Corruption

These are the most powerful corruption devils, and among some of the most
powerful devils in Hell. They're the ones who run long term projects of the
"turn a whole kingdom to evil" variety, and have a particular strong hatred of
"incorruptible" people or institutions, working extra-hard to prove that
assertion wrong or destroy these offenders if they can't. Sires of Corruption
can make a particular kind of infernal contract that can make the signing mortal
gain power from utterly embracing their vices, thought they still remain pawns
of the devil in the end.

These creatures are Medium Immortal Humanoids (devils), and Level 29 Elite
Controllers (leaders) with 530 HP. They have 15 fire resistance and a ground
speed of 6, but no special senses.

Their **Lasting Corruption** aura is actually a bit worse than that of a basic
corruption devil, since the save penalty only applies to charm effects. All of
their non-basic attacks are charm effects, so it doesn't make a difference to
the sire itself, but it's less helpful to its allies.

Their basic attack is a **Corrupting Touch** that does a sizable amount of
psychic damage and inflicts a -2 penalty to defenses against charm effects for a
turn, so you want to alternate it with the other attack: **Touch of Vice**
(recharge 4+), which deals the same amount of psychic damage and inflicts one of
_six_ possible effects named after different vices or sins. They're all (save
ends), and have the following effects:

- **Lust** causes the target to be marked by another enemy within 5 squares.
- **Excess** dazes.
- **Greed** slides the target 5 squares to a space adjacent to one of its
  allies, and forces it to make opportunity attacks against allies whose actions
  would provoke them.
- **Fear** pushes the target 5 squares and forbids it from moving closer to the
  sire of corruption.
- **Sloth** immobilizes.
- **Vengeance** auto-damages the target whenever they use an attack power.

The sire chooses which effect happens whenever it hits with Touch of Vice.

But that's not all! At the start of the fight it can issue a **Call to
Corruption** to summon six Corrupted Followers into the fight, and it can do
that again after it's bloodied! As a minor action it can use **Spread
Depravity** to give one of these servants a free attack.

And finally, when the sire is reduced to 0 HP, it uses a final attack named
**Lasting Vice**, which targets everyone in a Close Burst 5 with a Touch of
Vice (same damage, same choice of effects).

These things are nasty, and unlike basic corruption devils they want to get
right into the fray while surrounded by their corrupted servants.

### Corrupted Followers

These are mortals who were prey to some vice in life, and who were offered a
very specific kind of infernal contract in their moment of greatest despair or
misery. The contract gives them what they desire, and immediately afterwards
turns them into monsters made of the same vice that controlled their mortal
lives.

Followers retain no memory of those lives. Left to their own devices, they
contrive to spread their ruling vice among the surrounding population. Most
often, though, they're found in the service of their devil master. Usually this
is a Sire of Corruption, but it can also be some other powerful devil, or some
mortal villain to whom the fiend has loaned them.

Corrupted Followers are epic-tier minions, and there's a different variety for
every vice a Sire of Corruption can generate. It's entirely appropriate for the
Sire's Call to Corruption power to summon a full sentai team with the six
varieties, but you can vary its composition to have simpler combats.

Each Follower type has a touch attack that targets Will and does a bit of damage
with a rider, an effect that happens when it dies, and sometimes an aura or
passive trait. All of those will be related to each Follower's Thematic
Vice. Here they are:

- **Lust**: Corrupted Lechers are Level 24 Minion Lurkers. They can't be
  targeted unless they're the closest enemy to the attacker; their attacks can
  be melee or ranged, and make the target be marked by another enemy for a turn;
  when they die, they make their killer move its speed towards another enemy.

- **Excess**: Corrupted Gluttons are Level 25 Minion Soldiers that attack with
  bites that also grab the target. Once they have a target grabbed they can chew
  on them for automatic damage. When they die, they curse their killer to take
  damage next turn unless the PC recovers HP in the intervening time.

- **Greed**: Corrupted Mongers are Level 26 Minion Artillery. Their melee
  attacks slide the target adjacent to one of their allies; their ranged attack
  drain daily or encounter powers from magic items until the end of the
  encounter! When they die, they cause any daily or encounter powers from the
  item that killed them to become spent.

- **Sloth**: Corrupted Idlers are Level 27 Minion Soldiers. They have a small
  slowing aura, and their attacks prevent the target from taking move actions
  for a turn. When they die, they make an attack against the killer's Will that
  will knock the PC unconscious for a turn on a hit.

- **Vengeance**: Corrupted Lunatics are Level 28 Minion Brute. Their attacks are
  weak even for a minion, but force the target to make a basic attack against
  its nearest ally. If someone misses then with an attack, they can make a
  free attack against that PC, with the same rider as above. When they die,
  their killer must again make an attack against an ally. They're walking
  Three Stooges skits.

- **Fear**: Corrupted Cravens are Level 29 Minion Controllers. When they hit
  with an attack, they force the target to move its speed away from them. The
  same happens to their killer when they die.

## Final Impressions

This entry is not yet done. There are so many types of Corrupted Followers I'm
going to dedicate a post just to them.

I guess I'm still not entirely sold on the whole "Corruption Devil" lore. It
feels kinda redundant because this sort of thing was already supposed to be one
of the central themes for Hell as a whole. And the stat blocks use the word
"Corruption" so much it kinda starts to lose its meaning. The Sire of Corruption
seems like it was an entirely different monster that got retrofitted into this
entry. It's obviously inspired by the Seven Deadly Sins, which I feel is kinda
played out. But at least it's all seven in one monster, and it _is_ in-theme for
Hell.

Mechanics-wise, the Corruption Devil stat block might work quite well for any
bard-type enemies, with a few minor adjustments. The Sire of Corruption is a
scary combatant, but its mechanics are extremely tied to the concept of sin so
it might be harder to reskin. It would make an excellent basis for an Aspect of
Asmodeus, though!

The minions are flavorful, but fiddly. I wouldn't recommend using the full
spread in the same encounter.
