---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Rat"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Rats have of course been in the game since its beginnings. They have an entry of
their own in the Monster Manual and are present in the animal appendix in the
Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Rats are real world animals and have been historically reviled both for their
propensity for eating people's food stores and for carrying disease. That last
one is something of an undeserved reputation, as the worst diseases are actually
carried by fleas and not by the rats themselves.

Calling someone a "rat" is usually an insult implying cowardice, selfishness,
and treachery, and D&D tends to ascribe these traits to rat-like
monsters. Rats themselves are such a classic staple of low-level D&D play that
they're a bit cliche. "Clearing rats from a basement" has become a metaphor for
the sort of predictable tutorial quest that a lot of D&D-like video games used
to feature a few years ago.

Individual mundane rats are pretty much harmless to an adventurer, but they can
be somewhat dangerous in large numbers, forming swarms which are likely more
aggressive than their real-world counterparts. This being D&D, rats also come in
Giant and Dire varieties, and these are indeed a lot bigger and more dangerous
than their real-world counterparts.

## The Numbers

Between both books we have no less than 5 rat-related stat blocks! Some of them
are conceptually equivalent, but different enough that I think they're worth
discussing separately.

All rats are Natural Beasts, possess low-light vision, and have a climb speed.

### Rat Swarm (MM)

A swarm of mundane rats is a Level 2 Skirmisher with 36 HP. As a swarm it takes
half damage from single-target attacks and 5 extra damage from AoEs. It also has
a Swarm Attack aura 1 that allows it to make a basic against any enemies who
starts their turn inside. The swarm moves at speed 4 and climbs at speed 2.

Their only attack is a **Swarm of Teeth** that deals immediate and ongoing
physical damage (save ends).

Realistically I think a rat swarm would be more interested in running away than
fighting human-sized opponents, but this is D&D! Maybe someone is controlling
them, or maybe they're just plain mean. A swarm intent on fighting will likely
park itself in a PC's space and let the aura do most of the work, while using
their standard attacks to put extra pressure on a specific PC.

They're less dangerous than needlefang drake swarms because they can't knock
people down, but are otherwise a good example of a basic swarm monster.

### Scurrying Rat Swarm (MV)

While conceptually the same monster than the MM Rat Swarm, this entry has a
completely different stat block.

This rat swarm is a Level 1 Skirmisher with 27 HP and a ground speed of 6 (climb
speed is still 2). It has the standard swarm resistance/vulnerabilities, and a
Swarm trait in its stat block that helpfully summarizes the other rules it
follows.

Its **Swarm Attack** aura 1 does a bit of automatic damage and slides enemies
inside 1 square. The **Swarm of Teeth** basic attack does more base damage, and
does extra damage if the rats moved at least 2 squares this turn.

This results in a rather more skirmisher-y monster that will keep running around
for the damage bonuses rather than parking itself somewhere. Opportunity attacks
are a minor concern for it, because it's going to take half damage from most of
them.

### Giant Rat (MM)

Big enough to be a threat all by themselves, giant rats are Small in size,
comparable to a halfling. They're Level 1 Minion Brutes with a speed of 6
(climb 3) and a basic bite attack that does "minion" damage. That's all!

In practice you'll still want to use a "swarm" of them, only now you're tracking
each rat individually. They're about equivalent to the classic giant rats of
editions past, which had like 1/4 HD.

### Dire Rat (Both)

Dire Rats are even bigger than giant ones, and have that spiky aesthetic common
to all D&D dire animals. They're aggressive enough to actively start fights with
the PCs even when they're not cornered, and unlike their less terrible
counterparts they _do_ spread nasty diseases directly. There's some disagreement
as to their size category: the MM says Medium, the MV says Small. Either way
we're well into Rodent of Unusual Size country. Their speed is 6 (climb 2).

These beasts are simple Level 1 Brutes with 38 HP. Their only attack is a basic
**bite** that does physical damage and spreads Level 1 Filth Fever. As usual for
disease-vector monsters, infection is automatic under MM rules, and only happens
if you fail a save after the combat under MV rules.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is level 3: 2 kobold slingers, 2 rat swarms and 3 dire
rats.

So yeah, if you were wondering who would train attack rats, there you have
it. Kobolds do it, and goblins certainly do it too since they're supposed to be
adept beastmasters. Dire rats also tend to obey wererats.

I was never a rat enthusiast, and these stat blocks don't sway my opinion. At
the same time, I guess I'd feel like something was missing if the monster book
didn't have rats. The MV versions are slightly better, though there's not much
difference in damage for level 1 monsters.
