---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Phoelarch"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I seem to remember phoelarches appearing in one of the late Monster Manuals for
3e. I don't know if they appeared before that. Their 4e debut is here in the
MM2.

## The Lore

A Phoelarch is a fiery humanoid native to the Elemental Chaos. Their orange skin
and fiery hair makes them look kinda like a human-like version of the azer, or a
slightly differerent fire genasi. They're typically nomadic and adventurous, and
so could be found wandering anywhere in the universe. But when you see a
phoelarch you're seeing just half the picture.

The soul of every phoelarch is connected to that of a _phoera_, a fire bird
that's pretty much a mini-phoenix. Phoeras soar through the skies of the
Elemental Chaos, living their bird lives. Though smaller than phoenixes, they're
still giant territorial birds of prey and have quite a temper, so they can end
up attacking passing adventurers.

Typically, a phoelarch doesn't have a lot to do with their phoera and
vice-versa. They have a vague sense of each others' personality and emotions,
but each lives their own life, and has thoughts and concerns that are utterly
alien to the other. It's quite possible for them to never meet.

However, when one member of the pair is killed, the connection instantly summons
the other one, which will arrive knowing what happened and will be
understandably very angry at the perpetrators. Since phoelarches are more
widespread, the most common scenario likely has the PCs fighting them first and
then the phoera, but I suppose it could happen the other way around. As long as
one member of the pair survives, the other will eventually return to life.

## The Numbers

Phoeras are Medium Elemental Magical Beasts with the Fire keyword. The two
phoelarches we get here are tagged as Medium Natural Humanoids, but I really
think they should be Elemental as well and have the Fire keyword. As sapient
humanoids, a lot of their abilities come from training, so we get two stat
blocks for them. They still tend to use a lot of fire, though.

All the individual stat blocks here are regulars, but they're really "disguised"
elites when you think about it.

### Phoelarch Mage

Phoelarch mages love fire magic, and travel the world looking for adventuresome
mentors who can teach them using practical lessons instead of classroom
work. Some seek out their linked phoeras in order to gain a deeper understanding
of their link and of fire magic in general.

This Phoelarch Mage is Level 12 Artillery with 93 HP. They have Resist 10 Fire,
Vulnerable 5 Cold, and project an aura (1) of **Phoenix Heat**, which deals 5
damage to any creatures caught inside. That means you should be careful with
their formation if they're partnering up with flammable allies. Their ground
speed is 6.

The mage's basic attacks are a **burning dagger** and a Range 20 **phoenix
ray**, both of which deal fire damage. They also know a spell named **Flames of
the Phoenix** (recharge 5+), which is pretty much your typical fireball: area
effect, fire damage, plus ongoing fire damage. Presumably they also know plenty
of non-combat rituals, but those don't appear in stat blocks.

When the mage drops to 0 HP their **Rise from the Ashes** ability triggers and
they explode. This deals heavy fire damage (vs. Reflex) in a Close Burst 2. It
also creates a zone of fire that lasts until the end of the encounter and
damages anyone caught inside. Finally, when the mage's next turn comes up, a
phoera appears within the zone and joins the fight.

### Phoelarch Warrior

Phoelarch warriors are usually wandering mercenaries that seek to get hired as
independent skirmishers and special forces. While their moral outlook is as
varied as that of any sapient, even a dastardly warrior will usually refuse to
work for slavers.

This Warrior is a Level 12 Skirmisher with 114 HP. They have the same
resistances and aura as the mage, and a Speed of 7. Their main attack is a
**burning falchion** that deals fire damage and is a High-Crit weapon. They also
have a **Burning Step** trait that deals automatic fire damage to anyone who
hits them with an opportunity attack.

Like the mage, the warrior also explodes when dead, creating a fiery zone and
being replaced by their phoera in the next turn.

### Phoera

Phoeras are level 12 Skirmishers with 114 HP. As magical beasts they're sapient
and can talk, but their toughts are usually a bit alien to your typical humanoid
and even to their linked phoelarch. They have Resist 15 Fire and Vulnerable 5
Cold, and a damaging fire aura (2) similar to that of the phoelarch, but
larger. They run at speed 6 and fly at speed 10.

Phoeras fight with **claws** that do physical and ongoing fire damage, and can
shoot **feathers of flame** in a close blast 4 pattern. They can perform either
of those as part of a **Flyby Attack** as well, flying their speed without
provoking opportunity attacks and making the attack at any point in the move.

When they die, they explode and leave a fiery zone just like a phoelarch. If
their phoelarch is already dead, that's the end of it. If not, it'd make sense
for the phoelarch to appear in this zone next turn.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The sample encounter is level 12: a phoelarch warrior who fell in with a briar
witch dryad and a few snaketongue cultists. Do mind your positioning on this
one, as all of the phoelarch's allies are very flammable.

I like the phoelarch/phoera gimmick! Without it, they'd be just another "generic
fire guy" alongside azers, genasi and salamanders.
