---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read Threats to the Nentir Vale: Dythan's Legion"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-dythans-legion.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This post is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the others.

This is another setting-specific group.

## The Lore

Dythan's Legion is a large all-dragonborn military organization. As the name
implies, their leader is Legatus Dythan, an ambitious and charismatic leader who
dreams of seeing Arkhosia restored to its ancient glory, presumably with him at
the top.

The Legion uses the same ranks and organization as the ancient armies of
Arkhosia, and numbers about 500 members in total, usually operating in platoons
of 20 to 24 people. These are supported by war-trained drakes and behemoths, and
sometimes even by salvaged Arkhosian battle constructs.

Upon admission into the Legion, every member is branded with a symbol that used
to be a Turathi slave marking. Dythan's ancestors in the Drakerider clan used to
live in the border between Arkhosia and Bael Turath, and were taken captive in a
Turathi raid. After they were freed or escaped their enslavement, they took the
mark for their own as a reminder of what Arkhosia was fighting against, and
passed it onto their descendants. Dythan himself bears such a mark, and makes
sure his soldiers remember as he does.

Though the Legion usually operates far south of the Vale, a contingent of them
arrived here recently looking for ruins of Arkhosian outposts that are said to
have been here back in the old days. One of them, Rolaz-Gaar, is somewhere along
the shores of Lake Nen (in the NE corner of the Vale). Another might be
somewhere beneath the Ogrefist Hills near the Vale's western border. The Legion
detachments concentrate in these two locations.

Despite being fairly small when compared to those ancient imperial armies, the
Legion is still a large force by the standards of our narrative present, and its
members are well-trained and well-equipped professionals. They're not interested
in conquering the Vale, but they're unlikely to be very nice to anyone who
stands in the way of their search. It's unclear from the text whether Dythan
himself is in the Vale at the moment. If the GM judges the ruins contain
something really important, then he's likely to be here overseeing the searches
personally. If he's not, a sufficient challenge to the Legion's operations in
the area might result in him appearing with reinforcements.

## The Numbers

The actual people who make up the legion are all dragonborn, and their elite
training places them as early Paragon threats. We also get stats for their
salvaged Arkhosian siege towers, and for the Liondrakes they use as mounts. They
use other drakes and behemoths in various roles, but those use the base
stats for these creatures, perhaps leveled-up to match their handlers.

As dragonborn, all members of Dythan's Legion can use **Dragon Breath**, which
like the PC version is an encounter power that lets them breathe energy in a
Close Burst 3 vs. Reflex. The damage type varies per stat block, and can be
changed to match specific individuals. They also have Speed 6, and the
non-minions have the PC trait that gives them +1 to hit while bloodied.

Alignment-wise, every dragonborn here including Dythan has the Evil alignment,
which paints us an interesting picture combined with the slave marking story in
the Lore section. You could perhaps see them as greedy and ruthless imperialists
who are nevertheless vehemently against slavery in all its forms. It would also
be relatively easy to say they focus on the less-bad parts of Arkhosia's past
and make them Unaligned. Making them actively heroic is more of a stretch, I
feel, and would require bigger changes to their background.

Like we did with the Daggerburg goblins, we'll look at them in order of
increasing level.

### Dythan's Legion Warrior

The rank and file of the Legion is made up of these veteran soldiers. They're
Level 10 Minion Skirmishers wearing leather armor and carrying heavy
shields. They fight with spears in melee, and can throw javelins at range.

Their **Phalanx Formation** trait gives them an extra +1 AC per adjacent ally,
up to a maximum of +4. This would be a big no-no on a regular monster (remember
MM1 hobgoblins?) but it's OK to have on a minion since you only need to hit them
once.

The **Spear** Attack deals a bit of extra damage when they have combat
advantage, and allows the warrior to shift 1 square before or after the
attack. The **Javelin** is a standard ranged attack. Their breath is lightning.

PCs are unlikely to meet legionnaires in numbers smaller than a platoon, and
this stat block helps fill out those numbers without making the encounter
impossible. They can be easily made into regulars if you need more powerful
infantry for an encounter.

### Dythan's Legion Archer

These are battlefield archers, so they're trained to put a lot of arrows into a
group of clustered targets. They're Level 10 Artillery with 84 HP. The **short
sword** and **Longbow** basic attacks are solid, with the latter being the
better option. They can also fire an **Arrow Volley** (recharge 4+) that targets
enemies in an Area Burst 10 within 20 squares and does light physical damage to
each one it hits.

Their **dragon breath** deals cold damage and also pushes 1 square on a hit,
making it a good "keep-away" emergency power.

### Dythan's Legion Vanguard

Vanguards march into battle at the front of the Legion's infantry formations,
engaging the enemy directly to give space for the mobile Warriors to flank
them. They're Level 11 Soldiers with 111 HP, wear plate, and carry swords and
heavy shields.

They have the same **Phalanx Formation** trait as the Warriors, which means they
punch above far above their weight as far as AC is concerned. If you can't
isolate them from their allies, hit them in the non-armor defenses!

Their basic **Longsword** attack marks for a turn on a hit, and they can use
minor actions to **shield bash** marked targets. This does no damage, but dazes
for a turn. **Vanguard's Mark** (recharge when first bloodied) allows them to
mark a target that's up to 5 squares away with a minor action. If the marked
target doesn't end their next turn adjacent to the vanguard, the vanguard can
charge it as a free action that doesn't provoke opportunity attacks. This makes
the power an excellent way to hit the PC's squishies.

Their **Dragon Breath** does poison damage.

### Dythan's Legion Dragoon

Real-world dragoons were so named because they were cavalry that carried
firearms (so their weapons "spat fire"). The dragoons of Dythan's Legion got
this name from the fact that they ride the next best thing to an actual dragon.

Dragoons are Level 12 Controllers with the Leader keyword and 119 HP. They wear
leather like the infantry, and carry **lances** into combat. Most of their
abilities are related to mounted combat. The **Masterful Rider** trait negates 1
square of all forced movement imposed upon them if they're mounted; the
**Incensed Mount** reaction allows their mount to make a free basic attack
against an enemy who damages the rider; and even their basic lance attack knocks
prone on a hit if the dragoon is mounted.

Their **Battlefield Mastery** power (recharge 4+) is a minor action that allows
every ally in a Close Burst 2 to shift 1 square. And yeah, the mount is an
ally. Their **Dragon Breath** does acid damage.

Dragoons are quite dangerous when mounted! Canny PCs will seek to knock them
down and prevent them from remounting again.

### Liondrake

Captured young in the distant deserts of the south, these Large Natural Beasts
are the mount of choice for Dythan's Dragoons. They look a lot like dragons, and
have many of the same attacks, but are not sapient and lack breath weapons. The
specimen statted up here has been trained as a war mount and is a Level 12
Skirmisher with 122 HP. It has a ground speed of 7, a fly speed of 10, and
Darkvision.

The drake's **Fierce Mount** trait gives both it and its rider a +4 bonus to
defenses against opportunity attacks. It has both a **bite** and a **claw** as
basic attacks, and can perform **Battle Leaps** that allow it to shift up to 4
squares and then either bite once or claw twice. It has a **Terrifying Roar**
encounter power that is kinda like dragon breath, targeting a Close Blast 5,
doing thunder damage, and dazing (save ends).

Liondrakes are dangerous even on their own, but they synergize very well with
Dragoons. They also make great mounts for other kinds of paragon-tier "rider"
opponents.

### Arkhosian Siege Tower

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="left">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-tnv-dythans-legion-tower.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2011 Wizards of the Coast.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

These are ancient constructs built by Arkhosia and salvaged by the Legion. They
were either brought to the vale from the South, or salvaged from local Arkhosian
ruins depending on how you want to play it in your campaign. They are 30-foot
tall and 15-foot wide stone towers that move on 10-foot tall granite rollers.

A tower can transport troops in its two internal floors, allowing them to
disembark on enemy battlements. On top of it is a sculpted dragon head that can
swivel in a 360-degree arc and shoot fireballs at enemies. Being a construct,
the tower is capable of driving and shooting by itself, though if it gets too
damaged its occupants will dearly feel the lack of internal safety equipment.

Arkosian Siege Towers are Huge Natural Animates with the Construct keyword and
336 HP. They're immune to charm, disease, and poison, and have Resist 15 to all
damage originating from outside themselves. The rest of their stat block really
stretches the format in an attempt to model all they can do, starting with a
trio of very interesting traits:

**All-Around Vision** means they don't grant combat advantage when flanked;
**Juggernaut** means it ignores difficult terrain and doesn't provoke opportunity
attacks, but it also can't squeeze, make OAs, or grab creatures. **Living
Building** has a list of effects as long as my arm:

- The tower can occupy other creature's spaces, and other creatures can end
  their movement in its spaces. That's rules-talk for "it can fit people inside
  itself". When it moves, creatures inside move along with it as if it was a
  vehicle.

- The tower is 30 feet tall and has two internal 15-foot tall levels. The
  Athletics DC for climbing it from the outside is 20.

- The lower level has two iron double doors (break DC 25) that it can open and
  close as a free action. When the doors are closed, there is no line of sight
  or effect between the inside and outside.

- The upper level has arrow slits that allow occupants to shoot outside. It's
  linked to the lower level by 2 ladders.

Finally, the **Rough Ride** trait models how damage impacts the tower. While
bloodied, the tower is slowed and inflicts a -2 penalty to attacks on all its
occupants.

As a construct, the tower has two attacks. The **Dragon's Head** shoots
fireballs (Area 1 within 20) that deal immediate and ongoing fire damage, half
on a miss. And it can **Crush** with its move action, which allows it to make
attacks against any creatures whose spaces it enters during the move.

When the tower drops to 0 HP, it **Collapses**, making an attack vs. the Reflex
of every occupant that deals heavy damage and knocks them prone on a hit. The
tower's space becomes difficult terrain (a giant pile of rubble!).

The stats make no mention of a disembarking ramp on the second level, but it's
easy to say there is one there. It'd be as sturdy as the ground floor doors, and
controlled in the same way.

The best way to fight a siege tower is from inside, where you can bypass its DR
and "only" have to contend with its occupants. These are likely to be a
combination of vanguards and archers.

### Legatus Dythan

Dythan is big and imposing even for a Dragonborn. He wears an ornate suit of
plate adorned with Arkhosian heraldic devices done in gold inlay. He's not just
a competent general, but an extremely skilled combatant as well.

Dythan is a Level 15 Elite Soldier with 290 HP and the Leader keyword. He wears
his nifty armor suit and carries a shield, a sword and a brace of javelins into
battle. He has the same **Phalanx Formation** trait as his vanguards, and
projects a **Last Stand** aura (5) that gives allies inside a +2 bonus to damage
while they're bloodied. He also gains at +2 to hit while bloodied himself,
instead of the usual +1 for dragonborn.

Dythan might be a Soldier but he doesn't mark anyone. Instead he wants the PCs
to mark him! His **longsword** deals bonus damage if the target is marking
Dythan or has an active defender aura. If an enemy marks an ally within 5
squares of Dythan, he can use **Dythan's Challenge** to transfer the mark to
himself.

As a minor action he can perform a **Shield Bash**, which damages, pushes 1
square, and allows the legate to shift 1 square to follow. This is a full attack
with standard damage because he's an elite. Those javelins are **Shock
Javelins** that deal lightning damage. And finally, his **Dragon Breath** is the
traditional fire.

## Final Impressions

I really like Dythan's Legion. They're a major threat compared to almost
everything else in the Vale, but they're focused on doing their own thing and
have no reason to be immediately hostile to the PCs.

Depending on how villainous you want to make them, they might make a good
late-game antagonist faction when they find those ancient ruins and start
bringing in their full numbers to the Vale looking to conquer it and make it
their new base of operations. They might also work as uneasy allies against
other Vale-wide threats, like a full-scale Bloodspear invasion or one of the big
dragons.

[1]: {{ "/projects/tnv" | relative_url }}
