---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Rakshasa"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Rakshasas are inspired by Indian mythology and have been in the game from the
days of AD&D 1st Edition. In Fourth, they're in both the Monster Manual and the
Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Rakshasas are evil spirits encased in flesh. In their natural forms, they look
like humanoids with the heads of great predatory cats, usually tigers. Their
hands are also "inverted", with the palms located where the back of a human's
hand would be and vice-versa. This looks odd, but doesn't impact their dexterity
in any way.

A rakshasa's greatest desire is to spend accumulate lots of wealth and power and
to spend eternity surrounded by luxury and vice. They have absolutely no moral
qualms when it comes to achieving these goals, of course. Rakshasas are highly
skilled at fighting, arcane magic, and many other skills they had time to hone
during their centuries of life.

While each individual's abilities vary as much as those of player characters,
each Rakshasa has enough skill at illusion to be able to disguise itself as any
humanoid. They use this to infiltrate mortal society in order to achieve those
positions of power. Why go to the trouble of building a kingdom yourself when
you can just gank some king and replace him? And then maybe kill his family off
so you can replace them with your own buddies and hangers-on?

In other words: you know all those nasty rumors people spread about
doppelgangers? Turns out it's the rakshasas who do most of those things. And
since the doppelganger entry describes them as mostly just people trying to live
peaceful lives, I wouldn't be surprised if the rakshasas were responsible for
pinning their own misdeeds on innocent doppelgangers. A setting that includes
both cat-folk and rakshasas will also see the former shoulder some of the
later's bad reputations.

Fighting rakshasas is difficult. First you have to figure out who it is. Then
you need to deal with its entourage of lackeys (unwitting or not). And only then
will you fight the beast itself. Even if you kill one, it will reincarnate
elsewhere in the world after a period of time wandering as a tormented, bodiless
spirit. Reincarnated rakshasas come back as full adults with all of their
memories and abilities, and are quite likely to try to get some payback on
whoever killed them. Legends say a rakshasa can only be truly slain by a blessed
weapon that pierces its heart.

The Monster Manual says that the origins of Rakshasas are shrouded in mistery,
but that most sages believe they descend from demons who escaped from the Abyss
and er, spawned in the world. Rakshasas themselves scoff at this notion. Demons
are too uncouth to have produced such refined creatures as they!

The Monster Vault gets more specific: a Rakshasa is what happens when a Deva
goes bad. Devas are a playable race introduced in the Player's Handbook 2, and
occupy roughly the same narrative space as aasimar from previous editions but in
a cooler way. They have that "immortal spirit encased in flesh" thing going on,
and reincarnate as fully formed adults when they die, with little memory of
their past lives.

Devas have ties to the Astral Sea and to the forces of good, but when a Deva
turns to evil they come back as a Rakshasa when they next
reincarnate. Theoretically, if a Rakshasa repents and rejects its evil ways, it
will become a Deva again in its next incarnation, but such an event has yet to
be recorded.

## The Numbers

Rakshasa are Medium Natural Humanoids, with a land speed of 6 and low-light
vision. Their signature ability is **Deceptive Veil**, a minor action illusion
that allows them to disguise themselves as any medium humanoid. Piercing the
disguise requires an opposed Insight test versus their Bluff. Obviously, all
Rakshasa have pretty good Charisma and are trained in Bluff. The MV version puts
less emphasis on skills and has a fixed DC equal to 20+the level of the
rakshasa. We're not quite at "spot the doppelganger" levels here, but it's
close.

There's no less than six different stat blocks for rakshasas across both books,
five in the MM and one (plus two updates) in the MV.

### Rakshasa Warrior (Both)

What passes for a "foot soldier" among Rakshasa, you can likely find them acting
as elite bodyguards for their higher-ranked overlords. Warriors are Level 15
Soldiers with 142 HP and all common Rakshasa traits. Both versions are good
physical combatants, and the MV one has a few more magical tricks at its
disposal.

Warriors wear scale armor and wield heavy shields and longswords. Their
**longsword** attacks have them roll twice and use either result, meaning they
always have 5e Advantage on them. A hit does some damage and marks the target
for a turn.

They can also attack with their **claws**, which are just a weaker basic attack
in the MM but have an ongoing damage (save ends) rider on the MV, meaning you
actually have a use for them there.

If a marked enemy within 5 squares shifts or attacks someone else, the warrior
can use a **Tiger Pounce** to close the distance and make a claw attack. The MM
version shifts, the MV one teleports.

The MV Warrior also has an **Illusory Ambush** minor-action encounter power that
performs a complex switcheroo: it turns the warrior invisible, creates an
illusion of it on the same square, and allows it to shift its speed. The
transition is indistinguishable to observers and the effects last for a turn or
until the illusion is attacked.

### Rakshasa Archer (Both)

Archers are level 15 Artillery with 110 HP and all common traits. They fight in
melee with their **Claws** (which have a small ongoing damage rider in the MV)
and at range with their ornate **longbows**. They can make two basic longbow
attacks against different targets as a standard action. The MV version also
applies 5e Advantage to its basic longbow attacks.

Instead of making a normal or double attack, the archer can opt to use a **Ghost
Arrow** (Ranged 20 vs. Reflex; recharge 5-6) which does necrotic damage and
prevents the target from spending healing surges (save ends).

Aside from Deceptive Veil the MV version also has **Illusory Escape**, which
pulls the same switcheroo as the warrior's power, but triggers when the archer
is hit by a ranged attack. It recharges when the archer is first bloodied.

### Rakshasa Mage (MV)

Rakshasa Mages are Level 16 Controllers with 153 HP, all common traits, and a
whole lot of illusion spells. They make it almost impossible for the PCs to keep
to any sort of formation, since all of their abilities do something even if they
miss.

The mage's most common attack will likely be **Misleading Visions** (area burst
1 with 5 vs. Will; enemies only), an illusion that does psychic damage and
slides the targets 4 squares on a hit. On a miss, it still slides them 1 square.

A bit less often, it will intensify those illusions into **Visions of Terror**
(area burst 1 within 5 vs Will; enemies only; recharge 5-6), which do greater
psychic damage and immobilize (save ends). On a miss, they still do half damage
and slow for a turn.

They can also create **Persistent Images** as minor actions. These may represent
any Medium or smaller object or creature, and can be animate, but produce no
noise. They appear with 10 squares of the mage, and it's a DC 22 Insight check
to realize they're illusions. That's easy for mid-paragon characters, but they
still have to take the time to analyze the illusion. The image lasts for a turn,
but the mage can both sustain it and move it 6 squares with a single minor
action.

If the PCs manage to cut through all the bullshit and close to melee range,
they'll find the rakshasa mage is quite proficient with its **Claws**, which do
respectable damage and teleport 3 squares on a hit. Even a miss still teleports
the target 1 square.

### Rakshasa Assassin (MM)

This black panther Rakshasa is a Level 17 Skirmisher with 160 HP and all
standard traits.

Assassins fight with paired **shortswords**, and they can perform two basic
melee attacks per standard action. They also deal extra "sneak attack" damage
with combat advantage. The quotes are important here - if they attack twice,
both attacks get the bonus damage, unlike what happens with PC rogues.

Aside from the usual Deceptive Veil, they also have a couple of ninja
skills. **Shadow Form** gives them phasing during any turn in which they move
more than 2 squares. **Phantom Distraction** (close burst 1 vs. Will; recharge
5-6) is a minor action that does no damage but dazes for a turn on a hit.

### Rakshasa Noble (MM)

Nobles are basically slightly stronger mages with a different illusion
repertoire, and are the people warriors, archers, and assassins serve. They're
Level 19 Controllers with 178 HP and all standard traits. Their native speed
goes up to 7.

As a minor action they can use a **Phantom Image** (recharge 5-6) to essentially
give 5e Disadvantage to all attacks made against their AC or Reflex that
turn. If either result is a critical, though, it's the one that counts. There's
a bit of increased risk there.

The noble's main attack spells are **Mind Twist** (Ranged 20 vs. Will) and
**Phantom Lure** (Ranged 10 vs. Will). The first does psychic damage and dazes
(save ends). The second does no damage and slides the target 5 squares.

Every so often the noble can cast a **Frightful Phantom** (Ranged 5 vs. Will;
recharge 5-6), which does a heap of psychic damage, pushes the target 5 squares
and stuns it (save ends).

If all else fails, the noble has to resort to its weak **Claws**, which do a bit
of damage and blind for a turn on a hit. They're more of an aid to get away from
melee range than a proper attack.

### Rakshasa Dread Knight (MM)

This one could represent one of Eberron's feared Lords of Dust. It's a Level 24
Soldier with 220 HP and all common traits. Dread Knights project an **Aura of
Doom** (5) that cuts surge-based healing in half for any enemies inside.

Thei fight with **Longswords** in melee that have that "roll twice and use the
better result"/"5e Advantage" bonus, and also mark for a turn. Dread Knights can
use a standard action to make _three_ such attacks against the same target, and
if at least two hit the victim is also dazed (save ends). That's a lot of d20's
hitting the table at once.

They can also use **Claw** attacks, those these are nothing special. They could
benefit from an ongoing damage rider like the MV updates.

For utility, aside from Deceptive Veil they can use a **Knight Move** to fly 6
squares as a move action, though they must land at the end.

Dread Knights are a bit mechanically simpler than I imagined, but they're still
dangerous. I imagine other Lords of Dust would be in this level range as well.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

We have a whole bunch of sample rakshasa encounters here, ranging from level 15
to 24. They all follow a similar theme, being basically what you fight at the
end of the adventure after uncovering the rakshasa plot and getting past the
unwitting entourage. The groups consist either of all-rakshasa Evil Parties, or
1-2 rakshasa and a group of dangerous pets or other equally evil co-conspirators
(yuan-ti, cambions, devils).

I'm a cat person, so I quite like these villains based on looks alone. You want
to pit your party against Shere Khan, you use a Rakshasa. Given their decadent
nature and tendency to collaborate with devils, you might also be able to use
them as a metaphor for how big corporations have an affinity for fascism.
