---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 2: Tiger"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Tigers are real animals and have been part of the game since its
beginnings. They're some of the only animals whose "mundane" version was
considered worthy of a monster stat block at this point in the edition.

## The Lore

The book describes tigers as powerful and cunning predators that can be found in
"rugged natural environments". Let's elaborate on that a bit, shall we?

According to Wikipedia "rugged natural environments" means mostly flat or hilly
forests, but those can range from cold Siberian taigas to temperate forests to
tropical jungles. A tiger requires a large amount of territory, which allows it
to range far and hunt its prey (usually large herbivores). Tigers are "solitary
but social": they hunt alone but might nest together, with their range areas
overlapping.

The Monster Manual 2 does add a bit of interesting fantastic lore by saying
tigers are sometimes domesticated by _ogres_ of all people to serve as guard and
hunting animals.

A wild D&D tiger is not shy about including adventurers in its menu. If they run
across a battle while hunting, they might stalk its edges and pounce on any
combatant that gets separated from the rest.

Dire tigers are as usual larger, stronger and spikier. They're bolder and less
opportunistic, directly stalking prey that seems to be alone and weaker than
then. Their behavior is a lot closer to that of the tiger in _The Jungle Book_
than that of a real-world animal.

## The Numbers

Both mundane and dire tigers are Large Natural Beasts with low-light vision, a
ground speed of 8, and a climb speed of 4. Their signature ability is **Feral
Surge**, an encounter power that allows them to take a move action as a minor
action.

### Tiger

"Mundane" tigers are Level 6 Skirmishers with 73 HP. Their basic attack is a
**bite** that does immediate and ongoing damage.

During a fight, the tiger always wants to be moving and charging, as being on
the move makes it much more dangerous. If forced to choose between a static
fight and running away, it will likely take the second option every time.

The traits that make it want to move are **Blur of Fur**, which gives it +4 AC
against opportunity attacks in any turn where it moves 2 or more squares; and
**Charging Pounce**, which gives it bonus damage on charge attacks and makes it
so charging _doesn't_ end its turn. So it could use its standard action to
charge, and then either a move action or Feral Surge to move away immediately.

### Dire Tiger

Dire Tigers are Level 8 Soldiers with 89 HP. Their **bites** are stronger, and
they're much more likely to accept the challenge of a stand-up fight. Even then
they'll try to single out the weakest available target and kill it first.

**Hunter's Instinct** is an ability that helps then with that. It works exactly
like the Hunter's Quarry ability of a PC ranger. The tiger spends a minor action
to make the nearest enemy its quarry, which lasts until the end of the encounter
or until it uses this ability again. The quarry takes extra damage from all of
the tiger's attacks.

The dire tiger can also use a **Leaping Pounce** as a reaction whenever its
quarry is within 5 squares. It allows the creature to shift to a space adjacent
to the quarry and bite it. Since this is a leap, the tiger can cross enemy
spaces during the shift.

Marking the right quarry requires some clever positioning, but once that happens
it will be hard for the other players to protect the victim from the tiger's
leaps.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

These tigers have some cool mechanics to them, which is better than the generic
bags of HP I remember them being in previous editions. They also feel pretty
different from each other! I still would hesitate a bit before placing wild
tigers as opposition to my PCs, what with them being endangered in reality and
all.

We have two sample encounters here:

- Level 7: A couple of ogre savages taking their two pet tigers and their pet
  macetail behemoth out for a stroll. Shrek and Fiona?

- A weretiger running with a pack/harem of three dire tigers. The fact that you
  have tigers running in packs should be a hint that there's something unnatural
  going on.
