---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Demon, Molydeus"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm3-4e-demon-molydeus.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2010 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

When Tharizdun first planted the cosmic Seed of Evil in the Elemental Chaos, he
ordered his seven most powerful angels to stand guard over it. The angels' oaths
and sense of duty compelled them to obey. However, they all had some serious
personal misgivings about this whole "corrupt and destroy the universe"
business, so they were reluctant guardians.

When the seed inevitably corrupted them, it seized on this reluctance and turned
the seven into two-headed Molydeus demons. They have a wolf's head symbolizing
their fierceness, and a snake's head symbolizing their uncertain loyalty. They
also carry the same axes they wielded as angels, which in a surprising twist
contain a bit of the unspoiled light of creation. The demons are bound to their
weapons - when one dies, the axe dissolves into sludge. If it's stolen or lost,
the molydeus will not rest until it has been recovered.

The seed of evil hasn't needed guarding for a long time now, and the molydeus
have scattered. They wander the Abyss alone, or followed by small retinues of
other epic-level demons. They usually prefer Mariliths, but will also work with
Balors or Klurichirs. Very rarely you'll find one of them doing a demon lord's
dirty work, but these relationships rarely last long. I mean, if anyone is
really at an "almost demon lord" level of power it's the molydeus, so I guess
they don't like being the junior partner.

## The Numbers

There's only one stat block in this entry, which is okay because there are only
seven molydeus demons in all the universe. They're Large Elemental Humanoids
with the Demon tag, and Level 29 Elite Soldiers with 544 HP. Stronger than
balors and pit fiends, and on par with primordial colossi. They have Blindsight
5, a ground speed of 8, and are immune to fear.

Mechanically, molydeus share some similarities with Ettins, due to their two
heads. They have **All-Around Vision** and therefore can't be flanked; **Double
Actions** allows them to roll Initiative twice and take two full turns per
round; and **Dual Brain** allows them to automatically save against dazing,
stunning or charm effects at the beginning of each of their turns.

Like all demons, the molydeus has **Variable Resistance**, and since it's epic
the trait is at its most powerful: 30 resistance to an element, switchable 3
times per encounter.

In a fight, it'll probably open up with its **Dread Word** encounter power, a
fear attack that targets Will in a Close Burst 5, affecting only enemies. A hit
dazes them (save ends); a miss slows them and inflicts a -2 attack penalty (save
ends both). If it needs to mark someone, it will attack with its Reach 2
**axe**, which is a pretty beefy attack already. Otherwise it will alternate
between **Wolf Bites** and **Snake Bites**.

Wolf bites are Reach 2 do about as much damage as the axe and slide the target 6
squares to a square adjacent to the demon. Snake Bites are weaker, but have
Reach 3, make the target grant combat advantage, and inflict 20 ongoing poison
damage (save ends both). Both the axe and the bites count as basic attacks.

The wolf bite is an excellent positioning tool, so I guess the demon might use
if a few times to set the party up for the Dread Word.

## Final Impressions

Now _here's_ some proper epic demon lore! Mechanically, it has a suite of
attacks that's both thematic and varied, and indeed pairs well with mariliths
and klurichirs. The klurichir stat block works better as a demon created to
serve the molydeus than as a demon lord contender itself.
