---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the Dugeon Fantasy RPG!"
tags:
    - gurps
    - lets-read
    - dungeon-fantasy
    - dfrpg
---

I began writing this article shortly after finishing my reading of the
Neverwinter Campaign Setting. After thinking about it for a bit, and agonizing
over the actual text for a long time, I've decided to do one for the Dungeon
Fantasy RPG!

This is going both here in the blog and on the RPG.net forums, as usual, and one
of the reasons I'm doing it is because I feel lots of people over at RPG.net
would benefit from knowing more about this game. It's also nice to get a regular
GURPS-focused series in here.

## What is Dungeon Fantasy?

"Dungeon Fantasy" is the name Steve Jackson Games invented for the genre of
fantasy arguably pioneered by D&D: fantasy stories that are about a bunch of
player characters going into dungeons, killing monsters, and looting
treasure. Most of the works that fall within this genre are games, either
tabletop or electronic. D&D is the most famous but by no means the only
one. Most of the fiction entries in the genre are based on games as well, with
Amazon's Vox Machina being a particularly famous entry based on an actual
tabletop campaign.

Among gamers the genre is often referred to as just "fantasy" or "medieval
fantasy", because the "dungeon" aspect is so ubiquitous that it ends up becoming
invisible[^1].

And sure, you can use dungeon fantasy games to tell varied stories of intrigue,
drama, and wonder, but their core gameplay loop remains dungeons, monsters,
treasure. If you are using your dungeon fantasy game in its intended manner at
all, these things will feature in your campaign at some point, and they're
likely to be important

## What is the Dungeon Fantasy RPG?

The Dungeon Fantasy RPG is part of Steve Jackson Games' "Powered By GURPS"
initiative, and was released in 2017 after a successful Kickstarter
campaign. Powered by GURPS titles are fully standalone games that use the GURPS
rule set as a base, and modify it to suit their purposes.

I can confidently say it's the _chunkiest_ Powered By GURPS game, because the
ones that came before were single-book affairs, and this one is a large boxed
set. It removes everything from GURPS that's not immediately relevant to the
dungeon fantasy genre, but what remains is both plentiful and very close to the
level of detail in base GURPS. It's about as crunchy as either edition of
Pathfinder, if you want a d20-based benchmark.

Part of the reason for this wealth of material is that the DFRPG is a second
edition of sorts. Much of it had been released as a line of supplements for
GURPS, named "GURPS Dungeon Fantasy". There's dozens of them, and it's possible
we might get more. The boxed set takes a good chunk of that material, revises
it, and packages it with the GURPS core rules you need. The two lines remain
mostly compatible, but there are some important differences between them.

If you're interested in buying the game and are wondering which version to get,
my recommendation in most cases is to get the DFRPG boxed set. The digital
version is cheaper than a single D&D core book. The physical box is about double
that, which still makes it half the price of a D&D core set. I reviewed it
[here][2] when it came out, and in this series we'll be taking a closer look at
its contents.

## How will we do this?

The boxed set contains five books:

- **Adventurers**, which is your Player's Handbook with nearly everything you
  need to make a character.

- **Spells** contains the magic system and all the spells used in the game. You
  need this if you're playing a caster.

- **Exploits**, which is your Game Master's Guide with everything you need to
  run the game.

- **Monsters**, which is your Monster Manual. We'll certainly be in familiar
  territory when we get here!

- **I Smell A Rat** is an introductory adventure for starting delvers, with some
  twists since "starting delvers" means something quite different here than it
  does in D&D.

My reading here will assume you know what RPGs are, but know nothing about GURPS
or these books, but will necessarily be less detailed than those for the D&D
Monster Manuals since there's so much stuff to cover. Still, I hope it serves to
give you a good idea of what this game is all about.

[^1]: There "non-dungeon" fantasy games out there, of course, but we won't be
    talking about them in this particular series.

[2]: {{ "/2017/08/25/dfrpg-review.html" | relative_url }}
