---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Drider"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="center">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-drider.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Copyright 2008 Wizards of the Coast
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

Driders are another classic D&D monster, about as old as the drow they're
thematically attached to. Mechanics-wise, these drow-spider beings still do
pretty much what you would expect them to, but their background has changed
significantly.

## The Lore

In past editions, driders were the result of a curse inflicted by Lolth on drow
that displeased her. Driders would he hated and shunned by other drow and would
either live in isolation or form communities of their own.

In 4e, driders are instead the result of a _blessing_ bestowed by Lolth on drow
that _please_ her. There's a formal ritual named the Test of Lolth that turns
the worthy into driders (and kills the unworthy). Driders can often be found as
leaders or prestigious champions in drow communities!

I think this makes more sense than the old background, as driders were always
quite a bit more powerful than run-of-the-mill drow.

The MV splits the difference by adding that driders make their own caste in the
drow hierarchy, above most others but still subservient to the priestesses of
Lolth. Some of them resent this, and some grow to have more empathy towards
spiders than towards their fellow dark elves, so you can still meet the odd
drider hermit out in the wilds of the Underdark.

## The Numbers

Driders usually retain all the abilities they had as drow, including their
racial powers, and add to this the increased movement speed, climbing, and
web-spinning abilities granted by their spider halves. They're Large Fey
Humanoids with the Spider keyword, which means they count as spiders where
that's important.

The **Drider Fanglord** is a Level 14 Brute with 172 HP, present in both
books. It has trained Perception and Darkvision, with the MM version
additionally being trained in Stealth and Dungeoneering. It scuttles at speed 8
and climbs at the same speed with Spider Climb.

This warrior wears leather in its drow half and fights with a greatsword. It can
also launch a web as a Ranged 5 attack targetting Reflex, which restrains the
target on a hit until they escape using the rules for escaping grabs. The DC for
this is quite a bit lower on the MV, which also specifies the target can
automatically escape by teleporting. The web recharges on a 4-6.

As a minor action, the fanglord can bite someone against whom it has combat
advantage, dealing a piddly 1d4 physical damage and a nice 10 ongoing poison
damage (save ends). It also has the Darkfire encounter power we saw in the Drow
entry.

The **Drider Shadowspinner** is a level 14 Skirmisher with 134 HP. It also wears
leather, and fights with a shortsword and magic. It has trained Perception,
Dungeoneering and Stealth, as well as darkvision. The shortsword does damage as
usual and allows slightly different skirmisher shenanigans in each book: in the
MM, the drider can shift 1 square before or after the attack; in the MV, it can
only shift on a hit, but that shift also ends any mark on it.

The shadowspinner's ranged attack is a Slashing Darkness spell that has a range
of 5, targets Reflex, and does necrotic damage. It can also use the same Web as
the Fanglord.

The MM version has the Cloud of Darkness encounter power, which we saw in the
Drow entry. The MV version retains the cloud and also gains Darkfire.

As passive traits, the shadowspinner gains concealment from Shifting Shadows if
it ends the turn 3 or more squares away from its initial position, and it also
gains a sneak attack bonus against targets granting it CA.

Finally we have the plain old **Drider**, which only appears in the MV. This
Level 14 Soldier has 138 HP and Darkvision, but the stat block shows no trained
skills. It wields a scimitar and also wears leather.

The scimitar has Reach 2 (unlike the other weapons we saw), and the drider has
Threatening Reach with it. Scimitar attacks also mark targets for a turn on a
hit. Targets who ignore the mark take 15 necrotic and poison damage if they're
within 10 squares of the drider. Finally, it can use Darkfire.

## Sample Encounters

There are two:

- Level 12: a drider fanglord, a drow arachnomancer, and 3 drow warriors. Here's
  some of that "favored champion" action.

- Level 14: 2 fanglords, 1 shadowspinner, and a demonweb terror spider. This
  all-spider group could be an elite unit in a drow settlement, or an unhinged
  hermit family.

## Final Impressions

I like the new take on driders as the favored of Lolth. As I say above, it
makes more sense than the previous backstory for them, because I never thought
that "oh no, I have been cursed with awesome power" made much sense. I mean,
yeah, you're now a horrible half-spider monster, but for Lolth worshippers that
should be a plus.

Mechanically they pair really well with drow: the drow stat blocks lack any
heavy frontliners, and both the standard Drider and the Fanglord fit neatly into
that gap. The web powers from the Shadowspinner and Fanglord also do much to
benefit drow warriors or other lurkers, granting them easy and potentially
long-lasting combat advantage.
