---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Tiefling"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

{::nomarkdown}
<figure class="right">
  <img src="{{ "/assets/wir-mm-4e-tiefling.png" | absolute_url }}"/>
  <figcaption>
    Definitely not a D&D illustration
  </figcaption>
</figure>
{:/nomarkdown}

This article is part of a series! Click [here][1] to see the other entries.

Tieflings rose to prominence during 2e, and were added as a playable option
right in the Fourth Edition PHB, though they're a little different from their
previous incarnations here. As opposition, they're featured in both the Monster
Manual and the Monster Vault.

## The Lore

As I mentioned in other entries, Nerath is only the latest empire to fall in the
long story of the 4e setting. One of the many others that preceded it was the
human empire of Bael Turath, which fought for supremacy with the dragonborn
realm of Arkhosia a long time ago.

There came a time when Bael Turath was engulfed in turmoil, both because of that
war and because of its own decadence. In a desperate bid to retain control, its
leadership made sinister pacts with the forces of Hell. This worked for a time,
but it only delayed the final fall of the empire. Things turn ugly when both the
human nobles and the devils tried to break their side of the bargain. In the
end, both Bael Turath and Arkhosia met their end.

One of the effects of that diabolic compact was that the humans of Bael Turath
had their bodies infused with infernal power, transforming them into the
tieflings we know today. This transformation is hereditary and it persisted even
after the compact was broken and the empire fell. Today tiefling communities are
spread all over the world, either mixed in with larger multi-species settlements
or in small enclaves of their own, similar to dragonborn.

In addition to their distinctive looks, they retain a tiny bit of infernal
power. Both these things give them a bad reputation among other sapients, but
the truth is that modern tieflings are no more disposed to evil than any other
people. A tiefling could be a great champion of good just as they could choose
to embrace their bad rep and become evil diabolists.

Tiefling looks are a lot more uniform here than they used to be in previous
editions: red skin, prominent horns, solid red orbs for eyes, and a thick
muscular tail. They look like a less extreme version of a legion devil (which is
hairless with clawed hands and hooves for feet in addition to the other traits).

## The Numbers

Tieflings are Medium Natural Humanoids, and all of them have low-light vision
and some degree of fire resistance. The MM stat blocks also have the same
**Infernal Wrath** power tiefling PCs get. This is a minor action encounter
power that gives them a +1 attack bonus and a damage bonus against someone who
just hit them. It's a "revenge" booster, essentially. Like PCs, they also get +1
to hit bloodied targets.

Each book gives us two tiefling stat blocks. As is the case for all playable
humanoids, they can be of any alignment and could be used as allies or
enemies. However, all of them seem to lean into their infernal heritage at least
a bit, so even the good ones will have the same air of ambiguity around them as
the party's infernal warlock.

### Tiefling Fury (Monster Vault)

This is a duelist type, and a Level 5 Soldier with 63 HP. Its speed is 6, and it
has all common tiefling traits with 10 fire resistance.

The fury fights with a **longsword** whose attacks mark for a turn, and if a
marked enemy shift it can use a **Tail Trip** (melee 1 vs. Reflex) as an
interrupt to knock them prone and make a free longsword attack against them. If
an enemy hits the fury, it can use a **Defiant Curse** as a free action to mark
them for a turn.

### Tiefling Heretic (Monster Manual)

An infernal warlock. It's Level 6 Artillery with 60 HP, all common MM traits,
and a fire resistance of 11.

The heretic fights with a **dagger** in melee, and with bolts of **Balefire** at
range that deal immediate and ongoing fire damage (save ends). Once per
encounter it can conjure a **Serpent Curse** on a target (ranged 10 vs. will),
causing illusory snakes to appear and deal both immediate and ongoing psychic
damage.

When hit by a melee attack, the heretic can use **Cloak of Escape** as an
at-will reaction to teleport 5 squares. It also has **Infernal Wrath**.

### Tiefling Darkblade (Monster Manual)

An assassin-type, and a Level 7 Lurker with 64 HP and fire
resistance 12. Darkblades fight with **poisoned shortswords** that allow a
secondary attack against Fortitude on a hit, doing ongoing poison damage (save
ends). They can use **Cloak of Lurking** (move action; recharge 6) to teleport 5
squares and become invisible.

It seems they don't have any powers that allow them to do increased damage when
attacking from hiding or with CA, so they're in effect slightly weaker
skirmishers.

### Tiefling Occultist (Monster Vault)

Another infernal warlock! This one is a Level 8 Controller with 87 HP and fire
resistance 10.

Occultists fight in melee with a **Hell Rod** that does immediate and ongoing
fire damage (save ends). They attack at range with **Soul Fire** (area burst 1
within 10 vs. Reflex), which does no immediate damage. Instead it does 10
ongoing fire damage (save ends), and deals 10 psychic damage to the target if it
moves closer to the occultist on the target's next action.

As a move action it can use **Baleful Teleport** (ranged 10 vs. Will) to
teleport a target 10 squares and teleport itself to the square the target just
left.

If an enemy hits the occultist, it can use **Fiery Transposition** to deal 5
fire damage to all enemies in a close burst 3, and swap places with the enemy
that hit it.

## Sample Encounters And Final Impressions

The sample encounter goes all in on the hellish imagery: 1 heretic, 1 darkblade,
2 cambion hellswords, and a succubus.

I like tieflings, though more as a playable race than as an enemy. The enemy
stat blocks work well enough, however, and could also represent human warlocks
or other similar baddies.

[1]: {{ "/projects/mm-4e/" | relative_url }}
