---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Wraith"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Wraiths have been in the game since the beginning as a member of the Undead
Power Ladder, where they were the logical progression from wights. Here, they
appear in both the Monster Manual and the Vault.

## The Lore

Wraiths are still kind of a logical progression from wights, in origin if not
necessarily in power. As mentioned in the wight entry, living beings in the D&D
implied setting are composed of body, soul, and will (also known as the
animus). When someone dies in a place filled with strong necrotic emanations,
their animus might pop free and roam around on its own. This errant animus is a
wraith.

Wraiths perceive the world as if through a heavy shroud. Everything feels cold,
colorless, and gauzy. Bereft of a soul and tormented by vague memories of the
lost life and sensations they can never recover, they quickly descend into a
violent, hateful madness that drives them to attack and slay the
living. "Newborn" wraiths at first behave like they did in life, staying near
the ground and using doors, but soon they learn that gravity and solid barriers
mean nothing to them.

Unlike some other undead we've already seen, wraiths don't originate only from
evil people. All it takes is for the person to die under the "right"
conditions. A wraith who originated from a good and loving husband is just as
violent and dangerous as one that came from a serial killer. In fact, the first
wraith might specifically seek out and kill its former family without even
knowing why.

Wraiths kill using their life-draining touch. The animus of a recently slain
victim will pop free as a brand-new wraith almost instantly. These new wraiths
are weak at first, but if allowed to exist for long enough will reach full
strength. Even if the victim is brought back to life via magic, its wraith
remains - a new animus forms to hold body and soul together. Predictably, this
does nothing to improve the wraith's mood, and it will hunt its former self
tenaciously.

Sometimes, when a lot of people die suddenly and simultaneously, their tormented
animi coalesce into a single entity known as a Dread Wraith, which is orders of
magnitude more dangerous. Individual wraiths who stick around long enough, and
who kill enough, may also reach an equivalent level of power.

So there you have it. A flying, insubstantial killer who makes more of itself
whenever it kills someone, and who never stops doing that as long as someone is
still alive within reach. As RPG.net member Monsieur Meuble pointed out in his
own Let's Read of the 3.5 Monster Manual, that's a recipe for total
extinction. Fortunately for all of existence, wraiths tend to hang out in out of
the way places far from population centers.

## The Numbers

Most Wraiths are Medium Shadow Humanoids with the Undead Keyword. Dread Wraiths
are Large. All have darkvision. They're immune to disease and poison,
Insubstantial, and have a fly speed of 6 with Hover and Phasing capability. They
also have 10/tier resistance to necrotic damage. The Monster Manual and Monster
Vault versions differ substantially from this point on.

Monster Manual wraiths compete with needlefang drakes, ghouls, and hobgoblins as
the most annoying and/or deadly monsters a same-level party can fight. They're
**Insubstantial** and most of them have attacks with a **weakness** rider, which
means your PCs will spend much of the fight doing a quarter of their usual
damage against these monsters. They also have **Regeneration**, which shuts down
for a turn if they take radiant damage but makes them even more durable.

And if a MM Wraith does manage to kill a PC, their **Spawn Wraith** ability will
make another wraith rise from the corpse at the start of the original wraith's
next turn. This new wraith is identical to its creator and starts out at full
strength. If this ever happens you might very well be looking at the start of a
long, grinding TPK.

MV wraiths attempt to address all of these issues. Their **Insubstantiality** is
the new kind that always takes full damage from force attacks, and it turns off
for a turn if the monster takes radiant damage. They have no regeneration, and
**Spawn Wraith** creates a minion that can't spawn further wraiths instead of a
full monster. The weakness rider on their attacks has also been replaced by
other effects that retain the same "life-draining" flavor.

The differences between "basic" wraiths are big enough that I'm going to give
each book's version its own sub-section.

### Wraith (Monster Manual)

Having said all of that about wraiths in general, I have little left to say
about the basic MM wraith. It's a Level 5 Lurker with 37 HP, Regeneration 5,
Necrotic Resistance 10, and Radiant Vulnerability 5. Radiant damage also shuts
down the regeneration for a turn, as I said above.

Its **Shadow Touch** (vs. Reflex) does necrotic damage and weakens (save
ends). It does extra necrotic damage if the wraith has **Combat
Advantage**. Once per encounter the monster can use **Shadow Glide** to shift 6
squares, and any humanoid killed by it produces another full-strength wraith in
the next turn.

### Wraith (Monster Vault)

Once again, the basic MV wraith is mostly composed of the general traits I
discuss above. It's a Level 5 Lurker with 53 HP and Resist 10 Necrotic. It lacks
a numeric radiant vulnerability, but radiant damage _does_ make it substantial
for a turn, and it always takes full damage from force attacks. **Spawn Wraith**
produces wraith figments instead of full-strength monsters.

Necrotic damage from the **Shadow Touch** has been substantially increased, and
it further doubles if the wraith was invisible when it started the attack. No
weakness rider, though. **Shadow Glide** is an at-will free action now,
triggered whenever the wraith is damaged by an attack that does neither force or
radiant damage. It causes the wraith to become invisible until it attacks or
until the end of the encounter, allows it to teleport 6 squares, and _forbids_
it from attacking until the end of its next turn.

That's a evil lurker mechanic. I like it! An unwary party might think they just
popped a minion the first time this triggers.

### Mad Wraith (Both)

This wraith is different enough from the standard one that it got me wondering
that the explanation for it might be. Then it dawned on me that this is a
renamed Allip, a monster introduced in 3e that was pretty much a wraith with a
stronger insanity theme to it.

This is a level 6 Controller with 54 HP in the MM, and 73 in the MV. Both
versions have all common traits for their books, with Necrotic
Resistance 10. Let's start with the MV Mad Wraith, which is the better one.

It has a **Mad Whispers** aura (3), which does 5 psychic damage to enemies
caught inside and slides then 2 squares. It also has the standard
**Insubstantial** and **Spawn Wraith** traits.

The mad wraith's basic attack is the **Touch of Madness** (vs. Will), which does
psychic damage and inflicts a -2 penalty to all defenses (save ends). There's
also the **Touch of Chaos** (vs. Will; Recharge 5-6) which does the same psychic
damage, slides the target 5 squares, and forces it make a basic attack against
its nearest ally. A miss does half damage and slides the target 2 squares
(without the forced attack).

The MM version has the same attacks, the Monster Manual standard traits (and
problems), and Radiant Vulnerability 5. Its Mad Whispers aura shuts down for a
turn if it takes radiant damage, but otherwise works the same.

### Wraith Figment (Monster Vault)

One of these Level 6 Minion Skirmishers gets created whenever a Monster Vault
wrait kills a humanoid. They have a standard wraith's senses, resistances and
movement speed, but they lack the Spawn Wraith ability. Their attack is a
**Shadow Caress** (vs. Reflex) that does minion-level necrotic damage and slows
for a turn. They can **Shadow Glide** once per encounter, shifting 6 squares.

Having one of these pop up in a fight is bad news, but not as bad as if they
were full strength wraiths. And story-wise they're still a potential extinction
event, as they would eventually grow into "proper" wraiths given enough time.

### Sovereign Wraith (Monster Vault)

The strongest MV wraith, it likely belonged to a king or a fighting noble, as it
packs an echo of the sword it wielded in life. It's a Level 8 Soldier with 89 HP
and all standard wraith traits with 10 necrotic resistance.

Its basic attack uses the **Spectral Sword** (vs. Fortitude), which does
both immediate and ongoing necrotic damage, and also makes the target grant
combat advantage (save ends both). Hit or miss, the target is also marked for a
turn.

The sovereign wraith can also inflict a curse of **Lonely Death** (recharge
4-6), which allows it to make a Spectral Sword attack with an additional rider:
on a hit, all creatures except the wraith become invisible to the target. Which
is kinda terrifying when you think about it.

### Sword Wraith (Monster Manual)

This seems to have the same concept as the Sovereign Wraith at is root, but it's
a lot higher-level and possesses the same issues as all the other MM wraiths.

Sword Wraiths are Level 17 Lurkers with 90 HP and all MM wraith traits with a
Necrotic resistance of 20 and Vulnerable 10 Radiant. Their speed
is 8. They attack with a **Shadow Sword** (vs. Reflex) that does necrotic damage
and weakens (save ends). They deal extra damage when they have CA, and when they
hit 0 HP they can shift 4 squares and make one last basic attack as a **Death
Strike**, doing extra damage if they hit. This seems like it stacks with the
bonus damage from CA.

They also have the usual **Shadow Glide** and **Spawn Wraith** powers. The
printed tactics for them are "fight until bloodied, then run away to
regenerate". You might have noticed they have almost the same HP as the MV
Sovereign Wraith, and they also do almost the same damage due to the math
bug. The only issue preventing them from being dropped in late-heroic encounters
is their high defense and to-hit bonuses.

### Dread Wraith (Monster Manual)

This is either an incredibly ancient wraith or one that was formed when hundreds
of people died at once and their animi all fused.

Dread Wraiths are Level 25 Lurkers with 124 HP and all MM wraith traits, with
Resist Necrotic 30, Vulnerable Radiant 15, and Regeneration 20. Their speed is
10. They're surrounded by a **Shroud of Night** (aura 5) which weakens all light
inside by one step: bright light becomes dim, dim light becomes darkness.

Their basic attack is a **Dread Blade** (vs. Reflex), which does necrotic damage
and weakens (save ends). They do even more extra damage when they have CA, and
when they die they release a **Death Shriek** (close blast 3 vs. Will) which
does psychic damage and dazes (save ends). A miss still does half damage. Shadow
Glide and Spawn Wraith complete their arsenal. Yes, if a dread wraith kills a
PC, they spawn _another dread wraith_.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

There's a series of increasingly powerful encounters here, pairing dark
creepers, evistros, an immolith and a death titan with increasingly powerful
varieties of wraith. This section also mentions that wraiths pollute the
surrounding area with necrotic energy by their very presence, so now you know
how those "necrotic-infused" places that keep giving rise to undead get that
way.

The "angry mindless ghost" archetype is useful when designing adventures, but
D&D has always been remarkably redundant in this area. 4e went a ways towards
reducing this redundancy, but it didn't go all the way since it still gives us
ghosts, specters and wraiths. I did like seeing that the Allip was rolled into
the wraith entry, at least.

Mechanically, you should absolutely use the MV versions instead of the ones in
the Monster Manual. Level up the sovereign wraith and the figments if you need
dread wraiths for the higher levels.
