---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Apocalypse Spell"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

If I remember correctly, some monster books from 3e introduced the notion of
living spells, creatures made from pure magic and patterned after one of the
commonly available spells in the game. I guess Apocalypse Spells take some
inspiration from those, but the end result is very different. The classificaion
of Apocalypse Spell is only applied to those living spells that arise from the
most metal of magics.

## The Lore

Every once in a great while, someone manages to cast a truly epic spell. We're
talking the sort of thing that can slay a god, bind a primordial, instantly
destroy an empire, create an astral dominion from nothing, and so on. These
spells are so powerful the residual energy left in their wake can attain
sentience and become a construct of pure magic whose powers and personality are
modeled after the effects of their progenitor spell.

Despite their godlike power, apocalypse spells are simple creatures at
heart. The kind of magic that gives birth to them is usually destructive and
indiscriminate, and so are they at their cration. The passage of years allows
them to develop distinct personalities and goals. Thus they can end up allying
with other creatures who share those goals, or who manage to persuade them to
help.

If all else fails, there are certain rituals that allow a powerful enough caster
to assume full control of an apocalypse spell. They're most commonly cast by the
Forsaken, a society of epic villains who get an entry further into this
book. Angels, devils and demons also frequently try to influence these living
spells.

The book doesn't say it, but I would guess the population of each type of
apocalypse spell is fixed. The spells that generated them were unique, and were
only cast once. Killing one of them permanently reduces that population.

## The Numbers

All Apocalypse Spells are Animates with the Construct keyword, but that's where
their similarity ends. Each stat block described here represents the progeny of
a different epic spell.

They do have a common signature trait, however: **Unfettered Apocalypse** is a
reaction that triggers when they are first bloodied or when they take a critical
hit, once per encounter. It creates a perfect duplicate of the spell that lasts
for a turn. During this turn, it has the same HP and abilities as the original,
and can act right after the original's action. The duplicate can't create
another duplicate itself, however, so no infinitely spawning epic monsters for
you.

### Prison of Mual-Tar

The primordial Mual-Tar was defeated by the gods in the Dawn War, but couldn't
be killed. So it was bound in chains forged by Moradin himself and enchanted
with a unique binding ritual. As Mual-Tar strained against these chains, shards
of them broke off and fell into the Astral Sea, where they gained life. Prisons
of Mual-Tar are born with opposing impulses to imprison and destroy, and their
individual goals are related to one of these.

These apocalypse spells are Large Immortal Animates with the Construct
keyword, and Level 26 Soldiers with 242 HP. They have a ground speed of 6 and
Resist Force 15. Very few creatures have resistance to force damage!

The Prison is surrounded by an aura (5) of **Cloying Chains**, who marks all
enemies caught inside. As an **Agent of Divine Will**, it ignores
insubstantiality, concealment and partial cover (but not full cover or
concealment).

It attacks with a Reach 4 **Fettering Lash**, which deals physical damage. If
the target tries to make an attack that doesn't target the Prison in its next
action, the Prison pulls it up to 10 squares to a square adjacent to itself. It
can make this attack twice per action against different targets, thanks to
**Double Attack**. When the Prison is subject to forced movement, it can use
**Reactive Coils** to pull the triggering enemy adjacent to itself.

The Prison's divine origin makes it a bit reluctant to attack divine characters,
and it might be convinced to lend its aid against elementals and demons.

### Herald of Colorless Fire

In the ancient history of the Greyhawk setting, there were two great empires who
were at war with each other, and who ended up using apocalyptic spells to erase
each other from the world. The Rain of Colorless Fire was the more spectacular
of the two, so it's the one that gets mentioned most often in other
publications. It turned the entire territory of the empire of Suel into a desert
of ash and dust that was still a big feature of Oerth's geography in its
narrative present.

Heralds of Colorless Fire arose from the ashes of that desert and began
wandering the planes. They are made from that same fire, and their innate
motivation is simple: burn everything. They are, however, smart enough to toy
with their victims and to lure powerful targets into favorable terrain.

Heralds are Medium Natural Animates (construct, fire) and Level 27 Skirmishers
with 244 HP. They have a Speed of 8 (fly 6), and 15 fire resistance.

All of their attacks deal damage of the "fire and force" combined type, meaning
you need resistance to both types to stop it. Fire or Force Resistance alone
do nothing. This is a pretty good way of modeling supernatural fire that burns
anything.

Their basic attack is a **Caress of Flame**, and they can also use a **Storm of
Colorless Fire** (recharge 5+) that allows them attack a Close Burst 1, shift
half their speed, and repeat the attack. Each of these bursts does more damage
than the basic melee attack.

The Herald can use **Flickering Flame** to shift 4 squares as a minor action,
but this ability gets shut down for a turn if it takes cold damage. I do notice
it doesn't have the usual 1/round limitation of minor-action movement abilities.

In combat, these are zippy fraggers, well-equipped for constant hit and run
tactics. They should never stay still, and should never use a move action while
Flickering Flame is active.

### Shard of Uralinda

Once upon a time, there was a Winter Fey named Rodielle who was a member of the
Winter Court. Rodielle tried to woo a member of the Summer Court and was
spurned. He became so angry at this that, instead of resorting to the usual fey
courtly intrigue, he did something truly terrible instead.

Rodielle devised a spell of ice and death, and cast it upon the eladrin city of
Uralinda, the place which his former beloved liked the most in all the
worlds. Ice shards rained upon the city and ripped it apart, killing
thousands. That part was on purpose. Then the shards were animated by the souls
of the slain and began wandering all the worlds. That part was an
accident. Whoops!

The tormented souls inside the shards seek the release of final death, but they
only have limited control over their icy cages. So they throw themselves at
anyone who seems like they can put up a fight, hoping to be slain and
released. Sometimes they also get controlled by spellcasters to do their
bidding, which I imagine must be even less pleasant than their baseline state.

Shards of Uralinda are Medium Fey Animates (construct, cold), and Level 28
Minion Soldiers. Their basic attacks deal damage of the "cold and psychic"
combined type, and despite being minions they also have the Unfettered
Apocalypse ability. In practice, this means they last for an additional turn
after you kill them.

### Godslayer Inferno

These are the product of one of the many spells wielded by the primordials
themselves during the Dawn War. It created a torrent of white and violet flames
that prevented deities from discorporating and suppressed their immortal
natures. As an unintended side effect, the flames also ended up absorbing some
of the divine essence they burned away and became imbued with the spark of
life. They remain steadfast in their original purpose of murdering the gods and
their servants.

From the description, it seems that this was one of the few "apocalyptic" spells
that was used repeatedly as a weapon of war, so I'd guess there's a higher
population of Godslayer Infernos than of the other monsters in this entry. Yay?

Godslayer Infernos are Medium Elemental Animates (construct, fire), and Level 28
Artillery with 194 HP. They have Resist Fire 15 and a ground speed of 6.

Both their **Fiery Claws** and the **Fire Bolts** they shoot inflict a large
chunk of ongoing fire damage (20 aned 25, respectively) without dealing any
immediate damage. They can also use a special attack named **Godsbane Inferno**
(area burst 2, range 10) which does deal immediate damage as well as inflicting
more ongoing fire damage. This ongoing damage is more presistent - it's reduced
from 15 to 10 with the first save, and only disappears after the second.

The inferno's main source of immediate damage is **Cloying Flames**, which
causes all targets taking ongoing fire damage within 10 squares to immediately
take an amount of fire damage equal to that of ongoing damage.

Despite being artillery, the inferno also has good cause to stick close to the
PCs. Its Elemental Inferno aura (2) strips all enemies inside of any fire
resistance they might have and prevents them from rolling saves against ongoing
fire damage!

I don't think ongoing fire damage stacks, so it's unlikely the inferno itself
can inflict more than the 25 its fire bolts cause. But Cloying Flames makes them
pair _extremely_ well with other fire monsters such as epic demons. If nothing
else fits, you could add multiple infernos in an encounter. Not too many,
though. Their danger level grows very fast in proportion to their numbers.

### Light of Amoth

We already heard of the dead god Amoth during Demogorgon's entry. He was
responsible for splitting Demogorgon's original head in two, just before being
himself slain by the demon. Here we learn that there's more to this story.

No less than three demon princes stormed Amoth's domain to kill him: Orcus,
Demogorgon, and Rimmon. They all fought Amoth at the same time, and while
Demogorgon did strike the final blow in the fight, it didn't kill Amoth
immediately either. The god had time to unleash a death curse, one so powerful
it consumed his remaining life force in order to take the three demon lords
along with him in a universe-shaking explosion.

The three tried to get clear of the blast, but didn't manage in time. Orcus and
Demogorgon were a little quicker on the uptake than Rimmon, so they betrayed
Rimmon first and used him as a shield to protect themselves from Amoth's
curse. Rimmon was disintegrated, which is why we never heard of him before.

As you might imagine, that curse generated living spells of its own. These
crystalline giants also incorporate fragments of essence from both Amoth and
Rimmon, so they're compelled to hunt down demonic and divine creatures in equal
measure.

Lights of Ammoth are Large Immortal Animates (construct), and Level 30 Brutes
with 341 HP. They're almost gods themselves! They have a ground speed of 6, but
no special resistances.

They fight with their Reach 2 **Fists of Wrath**, which do a lot of
damage. **Fury of the Dead** (recharge 6+) allows them to attack every creature
in range with their fists. They can also use an ability called **Legacy of
Kalandurren** that targets everyone in a Close Burst 2 for cold damage equal to
that of a punch, and immobilizes them. Kalandurren was Amoth's domain.

When a Light of Amoth takes damage, it releases a **Wave of Retribution** that
does an automatic 5 damage to everyone within 2 squares of it.

All of this means you _want_ to let them get surrounded by the PCs.

## Final Impressions

I think these monsters are really cool! I don't know if any more apocalypse
spells were ever published, but I really like the basic idea behind them. I
wonder if there is one for Karsus' Avatar (FR) or the Mourning (Eberron). These
magical disasters feel like they're about the right scale for it.

Mechanically, I find them fairly interesting. They're not mind-blowing but they
display the consistently higher level of quality that would become standard from
this point on.
