---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Xivort"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

I'm sure xivorts appeared in a previous edition, but here they get some new
4e-specific lore.

## The Lore

Xivorts are a tragic threat. They are descended from gnomes enslaved by
fomorians and subjected to all sorts of tortures and experiments. Their long
captivity in the Feydark caused them to mutate into their present cave-adapted
state, which was further exacerbated when most of them were freed from their
captors by a cabal of night hags and brought to the Shadowfell.

The hags were only interested in liberating the xivorts as a way to deal a blow
to their fomorian masters, so they just left the former gnomes to their own
devices in the Shadowfell. These newly freed xivorts had only known torment and
suffering all their lives, so they set about dealing that to others.

As usual I'm not fond of painting a whole sapient species with such a broad
negative brush, so I want to say xivorts are just people and you can find whole
communities of non-evil individuals out there. The ones you end up fighting
might still fit the description here, though.

For good or ill, xivorts tend to associate with dark ones and gnomes. They have
a particular distrust of larger people, an echo of the hatred they hold for
fomorians. Goliaths and half-orcs tend to be priority targets in combat
encounters because of this.

## The Numbers

Xivorts are Small Fey Humanoids with a Speed of 5 and Darkvison. Their signature
ability is **Shadow Step**, which triggers whenever an adjacent enemy hits
them. It allows the xivort to teleport 2 squares to another space adjacent to
the enemy.

All of the entries here are level 1 or 2, which makes me think they're meant to
be novel kobold and goblin replacements.

### Xivort Slasher

This is a "slasher" in the horror movie sense. It fights because it likes to
inflict pain. As a Level 1 Skirmisher with 26 HP, it's not a big threat to a
trained adventurer, but from the point of view of a non-combatant it could look
like an unstoppable killer.

The slasher fights with a **short sword** in melee and throws **daggers** at
range. Besides the standard Shadow Step it has **Cunning Step**, which allows it
to shift 1 square when an enemy adjacent to it is hit by an attack. This doesn't
have to be one of the slasher's own attacks, it can be anything.

If several slashers gang up on a single enemy, that enemy will soon find
themselves surrounded by them.

### Xivort Darter

This one fights using concealable thrown darts, a tradition dating back to the
xivort's time as Fomorian captives. It's Level 1 Artillery with 22 HP.

Both the xivort's **Dagger** and its **Darts** are a bit weak, but it can use
**Dart Volley** to make two ranged attacks in the same action. Once per
encounter it can throw its special **Dream Venom Dart**, which does the same
damage as a basic one and dazes (save ends).

All of the darter's ranged attacks target _Reflex_, not AC, making it
particularly effective against heavily armored defenders.

Instead of the usual Shadow Step, the darter has **Darter's Step**, which
works the same but doesn't restrict its teleport destination. It's meant to let
them get away from melee.

### Xivort Net Caster

This one is trained to bring larger foes down so they're easier to kill. It's a
Level 1 Controller with 26 HP.

The net caster can use a non-damaging **net** as a ranged area attack to
restrain everyone it hits (save ends). If someone escapes the net it can throw a
pair of non-damaging **bolas** as a minor action to knock them prone and prevent
them from getting up for a turn. Then it moves in with its **short sword**,
which deals bonus damage against prone, immobilized, restrained or sloweed
enemies.

All of the status effects the net caster inflict make the target grant combat
advantage, so they go really well with monsters that can exploit that.

### Xivort Shadow Caller

A spellcaster using the 'mysteeeerious' Shadow source, who apparently traded
part of their soul to the Shadowfell itself in exchange for power. It's Level 2
Artillery with the Leader keyword.

Shadow callers user **daggers** in melee, but like most artillery they want to
stay further away and use their ranged spells. **Shadow Phantoms** is their
basic ranged attack, dealing psychic damage and making the target grant combat
advantage for a turn. This has an extra +1 to hit for every creature adjacent to
the target, be it ally or enemy.

**Deathmark Bolt** (recharge 5+) deals necrotic damage and lets an ally of the
caster make a free melee basic attack against the target. And **Shadow
Strangler** (encounter) is a "pseudo-summon" that immobilizes and inflicts
ongoing 5 necrotic damage (save ends).

## Final Impressions

As far as low-level enemies go, they're... okay I guess? Fighting these guys
instead of kobolds is a nice change of pace, but I'll confess I lose a bit of
enthusiasm for them when I realize they're another attempt to hype up the Shadow
power source.
