---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual 3: Dark One"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Dark Ones appeared in the first 4e Monster Manual, and you can read my take on
that book's entry [here][1]. This entry adds a few more stat blocks and tries to
fill in the lore gaps.

## The Lore

If you read the post linked above, you'll see that the MM1 contained little in
the way of Dark One Lore. I speculated that most of them would be peaceful
civilians like halflings are, but it seems that the Monster Manual 3 is moving
in the opposite direction by saying they're _all_ thieving murderers. I guess
this is a prelude for some of the even more egregious stuff you could find on
the Monster Vault and on some early 5e supplements.

This book says Dark Ones are "incapable" of crafting beautiful or useful
objects. This is described more like a divine curse than some sort of
neurological limitation. Everything they make is destined to be ugly, fragile,
and useless. Their armor crumples, their weapons shatter. So instead of making
their own stuff, they steal other people's.

As the MM1 said, most Dark Ones live in the Shadowfell. This one says that they
tend to see the middle world as a, well, "loot pin√£ta", full of stuff just
waiting to be taken. They tend to go for "loot caches" that are relatively
hidden from the larger societies of the middle world, and target groups that are
isolated from those same societies.

In other worlds, your typical team of Dark One acquisition experts is in direct
competition with adventuring parties for the XP and treasure contained in
dungeons, bandit lairs, and cultist strongholds. The PCs could arrive at one of
these places only to discover a group of Dark Ones got there first and taken all
the stuff.

Some of them prefer to work as mercenaries instead of thieves, and they'll join
forces with anyone who pays them. Often their clients end up being cults of
Vecna and other appreciators of the sneaky-stabby arts.

And of course, if you want to tone down the speciesism here, you can also say
your typical Dark One settlement relies on _trade_ more than it does on theft or
mercenary work.

## The Monsters

Most of the basic Dark One information remains identical to what it was on the
MM1. They're Small Shadow Humanoids with Darkvision, a Speed of 6, and two
signature abilities.

The first is **Dark Step**, an at-will move action that lets them move 4 squares
with a +4 AC bonus against opportunity attacks, and gain combat advantage
against any enemies it ends up adjacent to.

The second is **Killing Dark**, which causes them to explode in a cloud of inky
darkness when reduced to 0 HP, blinding any enemies adjacent to them for a turn.

### Hex Knight

Hex Knights are the closest thing Dark Ones have to noble warriors, though their
codes of conduct apply only to members of their own society. Their gear is very
similar to that of a common sneaky-stabby Dark One: leather or hide armor, short
sword, hand crossbow. Their fighting style, however is much more direct.

Hex Knights are Level 4 Soldiers with 54 HP. They mark enemies using the
**Shadow Hex** minor action, which lasts until the fight ends or the knight uses
it on someone else. Enemies who ignore the mark grant combat advantage to all
enemies for a turn.

The **hand crossbow** is a basic ranged attack and it's merely okay. Knights are
better in melee, where their basic **short sword** can attack twice with one
action, and each hit slows the target. Knights can also use their swords in a
**Vicious Flurry** (recharge 5+), which targets 1 or 2 enemies with a sword
attack that also does ongoing damage.

### Shadow Bolters

These spellcasters are usually on some secret mission to acquire a treasure or a
valuable bit of information, and will prioritize that mission over whatever else
might be going on. They might pose as mercenaries or allies to some other
faction as a cover. Once they have what they seek, they'll abscond, leaving
enemies and allies alike behind.

Bolters are Level 5 Artillery with 50 HP. They fight with **daggers** in melee
and with **black bolt** spells at range, and they're all about gaining combat
advantage. The **Deadly Precision** trait gives them combat advantage against
any enemy flanked by two allies, even if the bolter themselves are far
away. When they hit someone with combat advantage, they deal 5 extra necrotic
damage to the target and to any of the target's allies adjacent to it.

The black bolts also make a hit target take 5 necrotic damage whenever they
provoke an opportunity attack (save ends), which is very situational but might
be useful to punish mobile PCs.

### Shadow Speakers

Shadow Speakers are the Dark Ones that know the necessary rituals for crossing
between the middle world and the Shadowfell. They lead "acquisition" expeditions
into the middle world, and are responsible for bringing them back home. They
carry little clay jugs filled with soil from the Shadowfell as a focus for their
powers.

Shadow speakers are Level 6 Controllers with 70 HP. They fight with **short
swords** and shadow magic.

Their basic ranged attack is a **Shadow Curse** that deals necrotic damage,
makes the target grant combat advantage, and inflicts 5 necrotic damage when the
target provokes an opportunity attack (save ends both).

Less often, they can cast a **Choking Shadow** spell (recharge 5+), which deals
heavy necrotic damage and immobilizes for a turn.

Even one of these is an excellent force multiplier for a Dark One party, or
really for any encounter group whose members deal extra damage with combat
advantage. Just have then stay at the range limit for Shadow Curse and spam it
on the PCs to make them all grant combat advantage.

On the other hand, Shadow Speakers tend to be "load-bearing monsters" for Dark
One encounter groups, since they're the group's only way home. If the Shadow
Speaker is in too much danger, the entire group might try to make a run for it.

## Final Impressions

I like the greater encounter variety, but I dislike the extra emphasis on a
species-wide negative stereotype ("they're all thieves, every last one of
them"). I'll stick to my initial assumptions that these stat blocks represent
the Dark One equivalent of adventurers and other combatants rather than typical
members of the culture.

[1]: {{ "/2019/09/16/dark-one.html" | relative_url }}
