---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Spider"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Spiders have been in the game since the beginning. Here, they're present in both
the Monster Manual and in the Monster Vault's animal appendix.

## The Lore

While some real-world spiders can have a pretty dangerous bite, it's not really
suitable as a combat encounter. The books concern themselves with monstrous
giant spiders instead.

There are many species of monstrous spider in D&D and they're
everywhere. Deserts, forests, caverns ("surface" or Underdark), ruins, anywhere
a tiny spider would like can be home to a monstrous variety as well. The vast
majority of them are simply natural creatures, but some are the blessed of
Lolth and enjoy her divine gifts.

Predictably, drow love spiders and frequently train them or control them through
magic to serve in all the same capacities someone on the surface would use a
dog, horse, or drake for. Kobolds and goblins might also employ them if they're
one of the locally available fauna.

## The Numbers

All spiders shown here, with one exception, are Natural Beasts with the Spider
keyword. That keyword is important because, among other things, drow tend to
have lots of powers that buff spider allies.

The individual stat blocks vary a lot, but all have some level of Tremorsense,
and a climb speed equal to their ground speed with the Spider Climb tag
(obviously). Their basic attack is always a **bite** and almost always has some
sort of venom effect associated with it.

All of the Monster Vault spiders have **Web Walk**, which allows them to ignore
web-based difficult terrain. While this isn't explicitly listed in the Monster
Manual entries it would be fair to assume all of them have it too.

### Spider Swarm (MV)

The least monstrous of the bunch, this is a lot of normal-sized aggressive
spiders acting as a swarm monster. The swarm is a Level 3 Soldier with 44 HP,
tremorsense 5 and a speed of 6, along with the usual swarm resistances and
vulnerabilities.

Its **Swarm Attack** aura (1) slows enemies caught inside instead of granting
extra attacks. They attack with a **Swarm of Fangs** that targets Reflex because
they get inside your armor. It has an ongoing poison damage rider (save ends).

### Deathjump Spider (Both)

These Medium spiders are Level 4 Skirmishers with 55 HP. They have tremorsense
5, resist poison 5, and a speed of 6. Though they have Web Walk, they're not big
spinners themselves, and hunt by jumping on their prey.

The stats for the spider's bite are a bit wonky in the MM version: compared to
what the updated math says, their attacks are woefully inaccurate and abnormally
strong. The MV version fixes this. In both cases, the rider is ongoing poison
damage (save ends).

The deathjump spider's special attack is **Death From Above**, in which the
spider shifts up to 6 squares by jumping and makes a bite attack at the end. If
that hits, the target is also knocked prone. The MM version also does increased
base damage.

It can also make a **Prodigious Leap** as a move-action encounter power, which
allows it to shift 10 squares. So this spider could initiate combat by jumping
at the party's wizard from a full 16 squares away!

The MM gives it another trait, **Soft Fall**, allowing it to ignore the first 30
feet of height of any fall. This is absent from the MV version, probably because
they thought it was a bit too finicky.

### Bloodweb Spider Swarm

A more powerful version of the MV swarm, these spiders have been brought
together and are controlled by magic. Without orders, they'll default to
attacking the nearest living creature until it dies before moving on to the next
victim.

This swarm counts as a Level 7 Soldier with 80 HP. It otherwise works just like
the level 3 swarm, except that it's slower at speed 4 and its aura _does_ grant
free basic attacks.

### Doomspinner Spider (MV)

This chunky Large spider does spin elaborate webs to catch prey with. It's a
Level 7 Controller with 82 HP, Tremorsense 10, Resist Poison 5, and speed 6.

Their bite also has an ongoing poison damage rider, which increases if the
target of the bite is restrained, immobilized, stunned, or unconscious. Its
special attack is **Web Casting** (area burst 1 within 5 vs. Reflex), which does
no damage but restrains everyone it hits. The area of the burst becomes
difficult terrain until the end of the encounter.

As a minor action the doomspinner can also shoot a strand of webbing at someone,
in an attack named **Drawn to Doom** (Ranged 5 vs. Fortitude), which does no
damage but pulls the target 4 squares.

Though doomspinners can restrain enemies by themselves, they also pair really
well with other monsters that can inflict the conditions that increase the
effectiveness of their venom. "Multiple doomspinners" is the obvious setup, but
there are plenty of other options.

### Blade Spider (MM)

These Large spiders have two legs shaped like blade-like claws, and attack with
them instead of biting. They live in the Underdark and are popular drow pets,
having the Mount keyword.

Blade spiders are Level 10 Brutes with 130 HP, tremorsense 10, and
speed 6. Unlike most of their relatives, they have no resistance to
poison. Their basic attack is a **Claw** with a rider that does ongoing poison
damage and weakens (save ends both). They can make **double attacks** with that.

When used as mounts, they can make **combined attacks**, which means they attack
with a claw as a free action when their rider makes an attack.

### Cave Spider (MV)

These Medium spiders likely behave as a scaled-up swarm, with their size and
numbers being such that you can track them individually. They're level 12 Minion
Skirmishers with tremorsense 5, resist poison 10 and speed 6.

Their **bite** does the usual fixed minion damage, with additional poison damage
on top if the target is immobilized, restrained, stunned or unconscious. They
can also use a **Tethering Web** (ranged 10 vs. Reflex) as a minor action to
immobilize someone for a turn.

Combine a small horde of these with a leveled-up doomspinner or three, and your
PCs are going to have a bad time.

### Demonweb Terror (MM)

Native to the Demonweb Pits, these are the true blessed of Lolth. They're Huge
Elemental Beasts with the Spider keyword. All the other spiders in this entry
are simple Unaligned animals with Int 1, but terrors have Int 8 and are Chaotic
Evil. You can try to talk to them if you know Abyssal, but that will do you no
good.

Demonweb Terrors are Level 14 Elite Controllers with 296 HP, tremorsense 10, and
a speed of 6. Interestingly, they have no poison resistance, though perhaps they
should.

Their bite carries a venom that does ongoing poison damage and slows (save
ends). As a 1/round minor action they can shoot a **web** (ranged 10 vs. Reflex)
that does no damage and immobilizes (save ends). After they're first bloodied,
they can use the **Poison Spray** encounter power (close blast 5 vs. Fortitude)
that has the same effects as the bite's rider over the whole area.

These feel a tiny bit underpowered - they were likely only made Elite to pad out
their HP. However, they likely work well when accompanied by other monsters who
can capitalize on the immobilization and slowness they inflict.

## Sample Encounters and Final Impressions

The MM gives us 2 sample encounters:

- Level 11: 2 blade spiders, 2 bloodweb spider swarms, 1 drow blademaster.

- Level 15: 1 demonweb terror, 1 drow arachnomancer, 2 drider fanglords and 3
  drow warriors.

As you can see, the book goes all-in on the whole Lolth connection. Any
encounter with drow is likely to involve spiders. And while the lower-level
spiders will likely be found as dungeon wildlife, the more powerful ones will
very often be accompanied by drow as well.

I think giant spiders are a classic dungeon denizen, and work well when used in
moderation. Of course, drow are known for despising the concept of moderation
when it comes to arachnids.
