# Where I Watch: Mobile Suit Gundam

As far as media franchises go, Mobile Suit Gundam is one of the Big Ones. If you
live in Japan, or if you live anywhere else and are into anime at all, it's
impossible to not at least know _about_ it.

I've known about it ever since the early nineties. The Internet wasn't an
everyday thing here in Brazil, and we had all of one anime magazine, which
talked about the Gundam franchise in one of its issues. It gave a very broad
overview of the original show, plus Z and ZZ, which at the time was the most
recent one.

I've been curious about this ever since, but I watched very little of the
franchise. After following a fun Let's Play of Super Robot Wars (which features
the cast of like ten different Gundam shows), I finally decided to do something
about this.

It's my understanding that there are two types of Gundam show: those set in the
Universal Century setting, and those with their own continuity. The show I
watched the most so far is Iron Blooded Orphans, a recent show of the second
variety. I tried watching a couple of Unicorn Gundam episodes, but that's not
only an UC show, it's an UC show that expects you to know all about the history
of the Universal Century.

Which brings us to this: Mobile Suit Gundam, the original series. It first came
out in 1979, meaning it turned 40 this year. I'll be watching it, and commenting
here. Time to see why everyone thinks this Char dude is so hot.

## Opening and Backstory

The opening song is _very_ 70's. After it ends we're treated to a bit of
background exposition from our narrator.

It's been over fifty years since humanity began moving to space en masse - we're
in Year 79 of the Universal Century. As the narrator explains this, the camera
pans over the landscape of a lovingly rendered O'Neil Cylinder habitat, which
makes me realize that concept is a lot older than I thought.

As the narrator finishes saying that much of humanity now lives - and dies - in
space, an explosion rocks the cylinder. It's being attacked by a fleet of
warships and spaceborne humanoid mecha! The habitat furthest from Earth, named
Side 3, declared itself to be the Principality of Zeon and proceeded to fight a
war of independence against the Earth Federation.

The narrator tells us the war claimed half the solar system's population in its
first _month_. As he says this, we witness those Zion forces dropping the
cylinder they had attacked onto a city in the surface of the Earth, causing both
to be vaporized.

"Humanity was horrified at its own actions." No shit. This intro plays after the
opening on every episode, by the way.

Ever since that colony drop, the war entered a stalemate has lasted for eight
months by the time the show starts. My guess is the Earth Federation started out
with a lot more resources, but Zeon has Mobile Suits (those mecha we saw). Those
can fight really well in a variety of environments and carry weapons more
powerful than those of most conventional military vehicles. That, plus their
willingness to resort to atrocities, must have given then an initial edge.

## Episode 1

Our first episode takes place in Side 7, a habitat where a secret military lab
is hard at work developing the first Federation Mobile Suits. A badass
battleship named _White Base_ was developed elsewhere to go along with them, and
it was on its way to Side 7 when it was intercepted by a Zeon cruiser. White
Base managed to evade them... or so it thinks.

The first actual scene in the episode has three of those green Zeon Mobile Suits
infiltrating Side 7 through a maintenance hatch. One of them stays behind and
the other two go in to scout. I think it's a bit funny that the pilots have to
exit the mechs and use hand-held binoculars to observe the city. You'd expect a
spaceborne mech to at least have some built-in magnification. Anyway, they spot
a military facility, but find it odd that the suburban streets around it are
deserted at this time of day. Turns out the habitat is in high alert in
preparation to receive _White Base_ and make its delivery.



The girl in question, as we'll soon see, is named Fraw Bow. As she runs into
that house she begins to call out to someone named Amuro. Turns out an
evacuation warning was issued earlier that day, but Amuro was such a gearhead
that he didn't notice and kept fiddling with some electronics while in his
skeevies. Ms. Bow isn't fazed by his state of undress at all as she packs his
bags and urges him to get his car.

The evac order happened because a new Federation Battleship, the _White Base_,
is arriving at Side 7 soon. They had a surprise run-in with a Zeon battleship on
the way, which explains the extra precautions. Since there's already a team of
Zakus inside the habitat, those precautions are warranted.

The Side 7 military facility is a research base whose construction displaced a
whole lot of people into the suburbs Amuro lives in. It's being used to develop
the prototypes for the first Federation Mobile Suits, which they hope will turn
the tide of the war. Tam Rey, Amuro's father, is the chief engineer in charge of
the project, and _White Base_ is here to receive those prototypes.

The two Zeon infiltrators spot the huge trucks taking disassembled mobile suits
into the cargo elevators that lead to the hangar. Their orders were apparently
to observe and report, but the team rookie decides he'll become a hero if he
charges in and destroys the prototypes right then and there. He'll be just like
Commander Char and get his fame and glory from battle! His commanding officer
tries to hold him back, but the guy jumps into his Zaku and pulls a Leroy
Jenkins.

The most ironic thing here is that he has a very real chance of pulling it
off. The Zaku is leaps and bounds above the hardware used by the base's defense
force, which consists of conventional tanks and wire-guided missile
launchers. Its rifle can one-shot any of those, and it's either agile enough to
dodge the missiles or has some sort of superscience jamming that causes them to
veer off course.

The officer does send word back to the approaching Zeon ship, commanded by the
infamous Char Aznable, who is apparently a more handsome Darth Vader by the
looks of that helmet. His ship, the _Musai_, was returning from a successful
operation elsewhere when it ran into White Base and followed it here. Char
laments both the rookie and the officer's incompetence, but orders the officer
to assist with the attack and take lots of pictures of the new mobile suits.

The explosions rock even the underground shelter where the civilians were
hiding, and Amuro correctly judges that if they can feel the impacts from _here_
then the habitat itself is at risk and the shelter is useless. He runs off to
try to find his father in the base and convince him to allow the civilians to
board _White Base_ for evacuation. Just as he gets there and stops to ask a
couple of hurried officers for directions, one of those missiles hits the garage
they're at and obliterates the officers.

The strongbox they were carrying dismantles like it was cardboard, spilling its
intact contents out. A Top Secret manual falls right in front of Amuro's face
and he forgets the danger for a minute as he stops to admire the Gundam
schematics within. That self-same Gundam soon rolls by, lying down in a
transport truck, and Amuro catches his father's voice talking to a
subordinate. He says that yes, the civilians should be embarked into White Base,
but only after the Gundam is safely aboard.

Amuro runs towards his father and berates him for putting the integrity of a
machine ahead of people's lives. He's interrupted by an approaching Zaku, and
both his father and the soldier with him run off to find a tractor to pull the
transport truck, whose engine has died. Tam orders Amuro to board White Base
immediately, but he has other ideas.

I always heard Amuro "literally" fell into the Gundam's cockpit, but it turns
out he jumped in there voluntarily and began referencing the manual in order to
turn it on. He manages to find the trigger for the head-mounted autocannons,
which keeps the Zakus at bay long enough for him to get up.

Unlike the disassembled prototypes, which blew up with a single shot from the
Zakus, the fully operational Gundam is basically impervious to their
rifles. Rookie tries to get in close to fire point-blank when ammo for the
Gundam's autocannons runs out, but Amuro manages to grab his head and throw him
away.

The Zeon officer gives the rookie a boost so he can run away, but Amuro finds
the controls for the Beam Saber and gives pursuit. He slices the rookie's Zaku
clean in half, which is a Very Bad Idea. The resulting reactor breach causes a
massive explosion that breaches the habitat wall. If anyone had doubts that
evacuation is the best bet, those are soon squashed.














We get a bit more context from dialogues between Fraw and one of Amuro's
neighbors and later Fraw and Amuro himself as he drives them to the evacuation
shelter. This suburb is a recent addition to the habitat, and the families who
live there were forced to move to make space for the construction of the
military research facility. Amuro's dad, a guy named Tam Rey, is a military
engineer who works at the base and hasn't been home in quite a while.

The evacuation order was issued because a warship is going to dock with the
habitat today. Probably just a routine precaution, but as we already know a team
of Zeon soldiers has snuck in here we can say it's a valid one.

Cut to the military portion of the habitat, as a pair of officer-types watch the
ship dock. It's the Federation newest battleship, named White Base. The officers
are kinda jealous of all the resources that went into its construction, and a
bit angry that it seems to have drawn the attention of a Zeon ship on its way to
Side 7. That explains the infiltrators.

Said Zeon ship is commanded by a blond dude with a weird masked helmet that
kinda resembles Darth Vader's. Yup, Char Aznable. Looks like his ship was
returning from an op and ran into White Base by chance, and Char decided to
follow them. There's a rumor that the Federation might be developing a "Mobile
Suit" of their own that would allow them to fight the Zeon Zaku on an equal
footing, and this strange new ship could have something to do with that.

Indeed, White Base has come to Side 7 so the Mobile Suit prototypes can be
loaded into it. We see a young officer named "Bright" talking to Tam Rey a bit
as he fetches him to oversee the loading operation.

Loading the new mechs onto White Base involves the use of some very large
transport trucks and cargo elevators, and the two Zeon infiltrators spot the
activity using their binoculars. Char's orders were to observe and report, but
the unit rookie gets into his head that he will win heaps of glory with the
brass if he charges in with his Zaku and destroys the prototypes right then and
there. His commander tries to stop him, but he will have none of it.

The Zaku charges in, firing its giant-sized rifle. It doesn't take more than one
single explosive shell to destroy the first two prototypes, which were
disassembled for transport, and he keeps firing when the base's defense forces
try to engage him.

The explosions rock the habitat so hard the civilians down in the shelters feel
the impacts. Amuro correctly infers that these explosions could put the habitat
itself at risk, making the shelter useless. He runs off to find his dad and
convince him to load the civilians aboard White Base.

This leads him right into the midst of the battle. The base's defense forces are
mostly infantry and these launcher vehicles that fire wire-guided missiles,
which the Zaku pretty much ignores. I'm not sure if it has some superscience
jamming capability or if it's just agile enough to dodge the missiles, but one
of them ends up going wild and hitting very close to where Amuro is. The
explosion obliterates the two officers he had been asking for directions, as
well as their car, but _not_ the armored strongbox they were carrying, which
simply opens and drops a manual with a big "Top Secret" label right in front of
Amuro's face.
