---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Imp"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

If bone and ice devils are management, then imps are door-to-door salesmen. Evil
and evil-curious spellcasters love the little jerks. They're always willing to
bargain for infernal secrets of power, and look too weak to pull a fast one. Of
course, that's just how the imps and their bosses want it.

Left to their own devices, imps love tricking mortals into hurting one another,
which is made easier by the fact that they're pixie-sized, can fly and turn
invisible at will. They'll remain on any given fight only as long as they have
the upper hand, and will run away as soon as the tables turn.

Imps exist both on the Monster Vault and on the Monster Manual, but the two
versions are more or less equivalent. They're Tiny Immortal Humanoids (devils),
which means they're around six 6-12 tall - pixie-sized, as I said.

Both imp versions are Level 3 Lurkers with 40 HP. They have darkvision, Resist
15 fire, run at speed 4, and fly at speed 6 with hover capability. They're
trained in Perception, Arcana, Bluff and Stealth. The main differences are on
the imp's attacks, which we'll discuss below.

## Imp (Monster Manual)

The MM Imp's basic attack is a bite that does so little damage it's noticeable
even on a level 3 monster. It also has a tail stinger that's slightly more
accurate, does a bit more damage, and has a secondary attack against Fortitude
that on a hit does ongoing 5 poison damage and imposes a -2 penalty to Will
(save ends).

As mentioned above, the imp can also Vanish as a standard action, which turns it
invisible for a turn or until it attacks. Using this also recharges the tail
stinger, which firmly establishes the imp's Lurker routine: vanish, sting,
repeat.

The sample encounter is level 3: an imp and a whole lotta goblins, including a
gobling hexer. The hexer is exactly the sort of caster who'd summon himself an
imp familiar.

## Imp (Monster Vault)

The MV imp has the same attacks as the original, but they've all been
significantly improved.

Both the bite and the stinger have Reach 1 now, and do damage appropriate for a
level 3 monster. The venom no longer requires a secondary attack, and does _10_
ongoing poison damage while keeping its Will penalty. That's a lot for a level 3
regular!

Vanish still works like it did before, but its text has been made more
"technical", saying that the invisibility is dispelled when the imp "hits or
misses" with an attack. This is actually important, because it means the monster
can make that attack while invisible and will only appear _after_ it
finishes. You can't see it coming beforehand, or hope to interrupt its attack by
readying an action for when it becomes visible.
