---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Legion Devil"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The devil entries in both books make frequent mention of the "Legions of Hell",
and now we finally get to see who it is they're talking about. They exist in
both the Monster Manual and the Vault.

## The Lore

The creatively named legion devils make up the bulk of those legions. They're
kinda like the perfect ideal of the totalitarian soldier, as they don't have
much in the way of personal initiative or even personality. They live to obey
their commanders, and will gladly give their lives if for the glory of Hell
ordered to do so.

If you keep following the corporate analogy I've been using you'd be tempted to
equate legion devils to the many salaried employees who fill cubicles and mail
rooms in any giant corporation, but the truth is they're not very like those
people at all. They're a lot closer to the dystopian notion of a "resource":
numbers on a balance sheet, undiferentiated and replacable. Managers spend them
to achieve their quarterly goals and can always get more where those come from
because people will take any job they can in this economy. And they'll never
complain about any of this, because they're happy to serve the goals of
President Asmodeus.

In fact, all this grim thinking reminds me of several discussions I've been
seeing on RPG.net lately where some people say humanoids like orcs and kobolds
aren't acceptable "kill on sight" monsters, while others do a bit of contortion
to figure out a scenario where they would be because it's traditional. Me, I say
that if you need an army of faceless minions of evil who are never up to any
good and whom you should always fight with all your might, you should drop
humanoids entirely and look to these guys. Well, to all devils and demons,
really, but fighting devils-as-symbols-of-totalirarianism specifically feels a
little more satisfying to me these days.

## The Numbers

Legion Devils are Medium Immortal Humanoids (devils), and are always
minions. More specifically, they're minion Soldiers even though the first
Monster Manual didn't assign subtypes to minions.

The Monster Manual gives us Legion Devil Grunts, Hellguards, Veterans, and
Legionnaires, which are level 6, 11, 16 and 21 respectively. The Vault has
updated versions of the Hellguard and Veteran. All versions in the same book are
pretty much identical aside from level, and it's pretty easy to level any one of
them up or down to the exact level you need if none of the ready-made ones is
appropriate.

Legion devils are armed with longswords and heavy shields, and wear plate. They
have darkvision and a fire resistance of 5 per tier (i.e, 5 at level 1-10, 10 at
11-20 and 15 at 21-30). They run with speed 6 (level 15-) or 7 (16+), and
teleport with speed 3 at all levels. They gain a +2 bonus to all their defenses
if adjacent to another legion devil.

Their longsword attacks suffer from the damage bug in the Monster Manual
versions. The Vault versions fix this, and also do aditional damage to targets
that willingly move in their next action. When building your own legion devils,
you should use this version of their basic attack.

This indicates to me that despite being expendable minions, legion devils fight
in a very coordinated fashion, teleporting short distances to gain combat
advantage and using their attacks to keep enemies locked in place and allow
their bosses to focus fire on the biggest threats.

The sample encounters in the MM are:

- Level 6: 4 legion devil grunts, 2 tiefling heretics, 2 tiefling
  darkblades. Your basic diabolist cult and its summoned muscle.

- Level 21: 8 legion devil legionnaires, 2 ice devils, and 1 war devil. An
  infernal princeling and his personal security detail.

## Final Impression

There isn't much _actual_ flavor in the book entry for legion devils, but for
some reason they ended up sparking my imagination and giving rise to the rant
you see up there in the Lore section. In a game focused on fighting devils,
I'd definitely make regular versions of them for use as low-to-mid Heroic tier
opponents, and the minion versions would be a constant presence in the rest of
the campaign.
