---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Pit Fiend"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Pit fiends are the lords, barons, viziers and generals of the Nine Hells. In
other words, its upper management, just below the VPs (the archdevils) and the
CEO (Asmodeus). As such, they're both on the Monster Manual and on the Vault.

## The Lore

Each of the archdevils commands no more than a dozen or so pit fiends, each of
whom fulfills an important role in the workings of that layer, commanding a
whole army of lesser devils. The impression I get is that the Lords of the Nine
are much more concerned with internecine political struggles than with actually
running the business, so most of those diabolical schemes the PCs find
themselves fighting are actually hatched by pit fiends and carried out by those
lesser devils under them.

Pit fiends don't usually get involved in the schemes they manage. They only show
up in person when a big scheme is about to succeed... or when a band of plucky
adventurers is about to seriously mess it up. When they do show up, they bring
not only their own considerable power to bear, but also a number of backup plans
and dirty tricks. Your typical pit fiend has Int 22, making it much smarter than
its demonic counterpart, the Balor.

We'll take a look at each version of the pit fiend separately, as there are some
significant differences between them. In both cases they're Large Immortal
Humanoids (devils), and Level 26 Elite Soldiers (Leaders) with 486 HP.

## Pit Fiend (Monster Manual)

The Monster Manual pit fiend has darkvision, Fire Resistance 30, and Poison
Resistance 15. It fast as, well, a bat out of hell, running and flying at speed
12 (the latter with clumsy maneuverability). It can also teleport 10 squares at
will.

The fiend projects auras of fear and fire out to 5 squares. Both affect only
enemies caught inside, with the first inflicting a -2 penalty to all attacks and
the other doing 15 fire damage per turn.

Its basic attack is a Reach 2 Flametouched Mace, which does both instant and
ongoing fire damage. If you add both up, then you get a figure that's actually
appropriate for a monster of this level! The fiend can also attack with its
Reach 2 tail sting, which does a bit less physical damage and allows a secondary
attack against Fortitude for a bit more ongoing poison damage plus weakness
(save ends both). As an elite monster, the pit fiend can use a standard action
to attack both with the mace and with the tail sting at once.

Its "leaderly" ability is Tactical Teleport, which takes a standard action and
recharges on 4-6. This teleports two allies up to 10 squares away from the fiend
to any other square in that same radius. Instant flanking!

It has two minor actions. The first is the ability to create a Point of Terror
in someone's mind, a Ranged 5 attack that targets Will and inflicts a -5 penalty
to all defenses for a turn. The second is the Irrestistible Command, which
targets a lower level devil within 10 squares, slides it 5 squares, and causes
it to explode and automatically deal some fire damage to everyone in a close
burst 2.

Oh, and remember how fiends of all kinds in previous editions had the ability to
summon others of their kind somewhat randomly? The MM pit fiend can still do
that with a 100% chance success, once per encounter. The fiend can call up
either 8 legion devil legionnaires, 2 war devils, or 4 legionnaires and 1 war
devil. These are always explicitly an add-on to whatever encounter group the pit
fiend is originally part of, and they're _not_ worth extra XP. While none of
these are as individually powerful as the fiend itself, War Devils are strong
enough to be concerning and the legionnaires make wonderful fodder for
Irresistible Command.

Pit fiends start any fight they engage in by summoning reinforcements, because
why wouldn't they? They then use Tactical Teleport to set up some flaking
situations, soften targets up with Point of Terror, and then charge into the
fray to bash and sting fools to death.

The sample encounter is level 25: 1 Pit Fiend, 2 war devils, 2 astral stalkers,
and 1 marut concordant. This doesn't include the pit fiend's summoned
reinforcements! A harrowing boss battle for level a level 22 party, and the GM
gets to come up with a fun reason for the marut and abominations to be working
with devils. It's not _implausible_, it just demands some backstory.

## Pit Fiend (Monster Vault)

The Monster Vault pit fiend has exactly the same resistances, senses, and
movement modes as the Monster Manual version. Its Aura of Fear is a bit
different, marking all targets caught within it instead of giving them a general
-2 penalty to attacks. The fire aura is the same.

The Flaming Mace attack is the first attack I see on a MV monster that has the
exact same damage as it did on the MM! Clearly ongoing damage is supposed to be
always be included in the average damage for the monster's level. Makes sense,
as it will almost always get applied at least once.

The tail sting has been simplified into a single attack that targets Fortitude,
deals _25_ ongoing poison damage and weakens (save ends both). The original only
dealt 15, which was typical for epic monsters. 25 ongoing poison denotes a
"blood of the Lernean Hydra" level of toxicity. The pit fiend remains able to
make both a mace and a stinger attack as a single standard action.

The damage from the Irresistible Command explosion has increased a bit, and
remains automatic. It also retains the use of Tactical Teleport, which remains
identical.

The other big change here is that the summoning ability is gone. This is
understandable, as it wreaks all sorts of havoc with 4e's carefully tuned
encounter design rules. In its place is Nightmarish Punishment, which triggers
every time an enemy within 2 squares tries to shift or make an attack that
doesn't target the pit fiend. The fiend gets to make what amounts to a free mace
attack against the target, only it slides them adjacent to the fiend instead of
dealing ongoing fire damage. No escape!

## Final Impressions

I find it inevitable to compare pit fiends to balors, since both are technically
the strongest creatures in their respective factions that don't get individual
names and backstories in the books.

If you look only at their individual stats, I think Balors end up feeling being
scarier in personal combat. They have more HP, variable resistance, and their
direct attacks do more damage. Still, pit fiends put up a respectable show in
that department, and are much more capable of acting as a force multiplier for
whatever other monsters are fighting with them. As with all devils, team
composition is vital to make a combat encounter seem dangerous and scary. Even
without the summoning ability, I'd encourage GMs to make pit fiend fights
include a very large number of opponents, and have some of those appear by being
summoned mid-fight.
