---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Succubus"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Succubi are very traditional D&D monster. Just like mariliths (the _other_ sexy
fiend), they've been a part of the game since the start. Unlike mariliths,
sexiness is their main schtick. Here we can find them both in the Monster Manual
and in the Monster Vault.

## The Lore

Now, the first thing anyone familiar with older editions will notice is that
there's something very non-traditional about succubi in Fourth Edition. They're
devils!

You see, from at least AD&D 1st edition all the way to 3.5, succubi were
demons. I suspect this was mainly due to their Chaotic Evil alignment, since
they've always been beautiful and cunning manipulators with superlative skill in
seduction and other mind games. They're still all those things in Fourth
Edition, which has approximately nothing to do with the demon idiom while being
a 100% culture fit for Hell. Making them devils makes a lot of sense from that
perspective.

A succubus is all about the classic concept of infernal temptation, using their
guile and good looks to convince foolish mortals to sign away their souls and
perform evil deeds. They might also be sent to the world as emissaries to
important mortals, establishing channels of communication between these villains
and the lords of Hell.

There's no Succubus Lore entry in the MM, possibly because of space concerns,
but there is one very interesting detail in their description: unlike in
previous editions there is absolutely no mention of a succubus' natural form
being that of a beautiful woman with bat wings (even though the illustration
depicts one like that). Instead, the description says they take the form of
beautiful men and women to tempt mortals.

This means there's no separate "incubus" monster, and opens up a lot of other
possibilities. Maybe all succubi are genderfluid! Maybe their real appearance is
the lumpy hunchbacked goblin-thing of medieval legend... or it could just be a
real pretty bat-winged humanoid of any gender (including "none"). I mean, they
are fallen angels, and angels are androgynous.

## The Numbers

The MM and MV versions are quite similar, so we can discuss both of them
simultaneously. Succubi are Medium Immortal Humanoids (devils,
shapechangers). The Shapechanger keyword applies to any monster who can change
their shape in some way. It's mostly there for reference, since the actual rules
related to this will be in the monster's stat block.

Succubi are Level 9 Controllers with 90 HP. They have ground and fly speeds of
6, and the usual devil traits of Darkvision and Fire Resistance 20.

A succubus can Change Shape as a minor action, altering its physical form to
that of any Medium humanoid until it decides to change again or drops to 0
HP. It can duplicate any specific individual that fits that category and whom it
has seen before. Noticing the deception requires passing a CD 30 Insight check
according to the MV.

Going by the difficulty table, that's considered a Hard check for Level 15
characters, meaning a level 15 character with both high Wisdom and Insight
training will pass this around 50% of the time. Level-appropriate PCs will find
it even harder to spot a succubus in disguise unless they spend a lot of effort
maximizing their Insight checks.

The succubus' basic melee attack is a Reach 1 Corrupting Touch which which does
untyped damage and is otherwise uninteresting. The real beauty is in its other
attacks. There's a straight-up Dominate attack that targets Will at range 5, and
dominates for a turn on a hit. Dominated targets act under the direction of the
dominator, but also count as dazed (as they're trying to fight the mind
control).

Then there's the infamous Charming Kiss, which is more insidious. It's reach 1
and targets Will. A hit means the target can't attack the succubus, and will
interpose itself between any melee or ranged attacks targeting the devil if the
two are adjacent to each other. This lasts until one of the succubus' allies
attacks the target, or until the succubus is reduced to 0 HP. This effect can be
sustained _indefinitely_ out of combat as long as the succubus can kiss the
target at least once every 24 hours. More on that under Final Impressions.

As mentioned before, there isn't much difference between versions, and most of
them are in the Charming Kiss. The MM version has the effect described above as
a _secondary_ attack, requiring an successful (non-damaging) attack against AC
before the attack against Will can be rolled. The MV version has the attack
against Will as the primary, which I like. It also specifies that the
interposing effect is an Imediate Interrupt, which IIRC limits it to once per
turn. I like this change less, because it sounds a bit less fun to the cruel GM
in me.

The sample encounter is level 9, 1 succubus, 2 snaketongue assassins (yuan-ti)
and 2 constrictor snakes. Zehir wasn't mentioned by name under "gods who are
friends with Asmodeus", but this is like the third snake-themed encounter here,
so I guess he's included in that group.

## Final Impression

The succubus is the iconic "sexy monster"... in theory. My impression is that if
you want to turn even the most impulsive lecherous barbarian into a chaste
ascetic all you have to do is announce a succubus is somewhere nearby. And if
you want to turn that barbarian into a chaste ascetic _contract lawyer_, you
show them the description of Charming Kiss. They're going to spend all their
time between turns looking for loopholes in there. It's wonderful!

Let's enumerate a few of them... A PC under the effect of Charming Kiss can't
attack the succubus, but they are in no way compelled to attack the other
PCs and can still attack the succubus' allies normally. They are compelled to
take attacks aimed at the succubus if the two are adjacent, but are _not_
compelled to stay adjacent to it.

I mean, clearly the intent is that the Kiss makes the target fall in love with
the succubus. They'd want to stay close to her and make impassioned pleas for
the party to spare her and so on. But I think few players would enjoy
roleplaying that to the detriment of the group, particularly in the middle of a
fight. So here you have our brave barbarian gloating that he's far too clever to
be taken in by the succubus' devilish wiles... when in truth the succubus has
succeeded in turning him into chaste ascetic contract lawyer who keeps running
away from her.

The succubus can pursue by flying, and can keep trying to charm other
people. There's no restriction on the number of charmed targets! And there's
always Dominate for preventing the PCs from running away. Clearly, the best
succubus encounter isn't the one described above, but a succubus surrounded by
innocent charmed victims who will do anything to protect their love.
