---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: War Devil"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

The War Devil, previously known as the Horned Devil and also known as the
Malebranche, has been a staple of D&D since at least AD&D First Edition. You
know those traditional images of winged, horned devils poking the damned with
tridents? They depict these guys. In 4e, they're only on the Monster Manual.

## The Lore

A War Devil is about the most powerful devil that's likely to be found in the
service of a summoner. In the overall diabolic hierarchy they only take orders
from pit fiends or archidevils. It some mortal tyrant is summoning up a literal
army from Hell, a malebranche is going to be at the head of that army, and will
have ice devil senior officers. At Int 15, that malebranche is also likely
cooking up a scheme to bring his pit fiend boss into the world for a hostile
takeover of the tyrant's operation.

## The Numbers

The War Devil is a Level 22 Brute (Leader) with 255 HP. It has a speed of 8, and
a clumsy flight speed of 8. Like all devils it has darkvision and is highly
resistant to fire (resistance 30, in this case).

Its attacks are a little weird. The basic melee attack is a Reach 1 claw which,
as usual for devils, is weak and useless. The infamous trident is Reach 2 and,
weirdly enough, recharges on a 4-6 instead of being at-will. It does more damage
than the claw, but way less than it should for a level 22 brute. On a hit the
target also takes a bit of ongoing damage, slides to a square adjacent to the
malebranche, and is knocked prone.

Despite being a brute, the war devil has a very soldierly minor action at-will
ability called Besieged Foe. This automatically marks a target within line of
sight of the malebranche, and gives the monster's allies +2 to attacks made
against it. This lasts until the malebranche uses the ability against someone
else, or until the end of the encounter.

As an at-will move action it can use Devilish Transposition, a teleport power
which makes it swap places with an allied devil within 20 squares.

And as a minor action that recharges on 5-6, it can employ Fiendish Tactics to
direct up to two equal-or-lower-level devil allies to make a move action or a
basic attack out of turn.

As a brute the War Devil wants to be right on the front lines tying up your
defenders. Then when one of its more mobile buddies manages to make it to your
squishies, it's going to swap places with them and direct its _other_ buddies to
run closer for a proper stomping.

War devils pair exceedingly well with... other war devils! They can each use
Besieged Foe on a different target and engage someone else they're not marking,
and can use Fiendish Tactics on each other. They also go well with other highly
mobile devils to set up transposition combos, and can be pretty dangerous when
combined with a ridiculous number of legion devils.

The sample encounter is level 21: 1 war devil, 1 ice devil, 2 bone devils (who
teleport at will, rememeber) and 12 legion devil legionnaires (the level 21
variant).

## Final Impression

The tactical aspect of the war devil's powers is quite interesting, but they
suffer heavily from the math bug. Personally, I'd make their trident an at will
attack with level-appropriate damage and get rid of the claw while keeping
everything else. I'd also make them soldiers instead of brutes, since the flavor
of their powers is a lot more "soldierly" than "brutish".

Flavor-wise... I guess I can kinda see why they were left out of the Monster
Vault. Even back in previous editions I imagine it would be hard to distinguish
a horned devil from, say, a bearded devil if you were not already familiar with
the monster entries. Changing their name to War Devil was probably an attempt at
making them more distinctive, but the success was mixed. They're a bit like
junior pit fiends, so if you're strapped for space and are already including pit
fiends in your lineup, I can see leaving these guys out.
