---
layout: title
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Goristro"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

A Goristro is basically a bigger, furrier, and spikier version of the Bull Demon
from classic Doom. They're described in the Monster Manual as "living siege
engines", and as Baphomet's favorite demon type. They're not on the Monster
Vault.

Goristros are Huge Elemental Humanoids (demons), which means they have huge
guts. "Humanoid" is even kinda applicable if you ignore the digitigrade legs
ending in hooves. They have darkvision and variable resistance 20 switchable two
times per encounter. With Int 6, they behave pretty much in the stereotypical
demon fashion, being all about charging things until they're paste.

A typical Goristro is a Level 19 Elite Brute with 450 HP. Its basic attack is a
Reach 3 Slam, of which it can make two per standard action. Its Goring Charges
do increased damage when compared to the basic slam, also pushing the target and
knocking them prone on a hit.

It other powers are immediate reactions. Goristro Stomp triggers whenever a
non-adjacent enemy moves adjacent to the demon and recharges on a 4-6. The name
at first made me think it was an area effect shockwave, but it's actually a
single-target attack that does about 1.5 times as much damage as a basic slam!

When bloodied, the demon gains access to Raging Frenzy, its other reaction
power. Whenever someone attacks it in melee, it makes a basic attack against
that enemy.

So goristros charge anything they want to destroy, and keep distributing slams
and stomps while ignoring their own safety. Since they want to destroy
everything and everyone, they're never not charging and slamming. Rip and tear!

The sample encounter is level 18 and has one goristro, two savage minotaurs and
3 abyssal ghouls. The ghouls are kind of Orcus' thing, but the presence of the
minotaurs as the possible summoners would indicate this is a Baphomet operation.

## Final Impressions

A goristro is a demon's demon, which is to say it's a near-mindless rage
machine. By themselves they're kinda boring. You should place them alongside
whoemever summoned them, or alongside more interesting demons if the party is
taking the fight to the Abyss for some reason.
