---
layout: post
title: "Let's Read the 4e Monster Manual/Vault: Hobgoblins"
tags:
    - dnd4
    - lets-read
---

Like other goblinoids, hobs have been in D&D since the beginning, where they
used to fit right above Orcs in the Humanoid Power Ladder. Having 1+1 HD
prevented them from being casually cleaved by fighters.

In 4e, as I've already discussed, they're the most disciplined and militaristic
of goblinoids, and likely to be in charge in any situation where the three types
are working together. They produce their fair share of empire-building
commanders, and can also be found working as mercenaries for any number of
clients. Their discipline makes them the most reliable goblinoid mercenaries
money can buy.

Once again we have seven hobgoblin stat blocks in the MM and four in the
MV. Let's look at them by order of level.

## The Numbers

Hobgoblins are some of the monsters that changed the most between books, and
this includes their standard traits. Both versions have Speed 6 and low-light
vision, but the signature powers are pretty different.

Monster Manual hobgoblins have two such traits: Hobgoblin Resilience is a
reaction that allows them to immediately make a save when hit by an effect a
save can end. And Phalanx Soldier is a passive trait that gives them a +2 bonus
to AC when adjacent to at least one other hobgoblin. All hobs have the first,
and only warrior-types have the second.

You can probably see the problem here - these two traits make hobgoblins a lot
harder to kill than their level would indicate. A fight against hobgoblins could
drag on for a long time, particularly when the players are still inexperienced.

The signature trait for Monster Vault hobgoblins is Phalanx Movement, a move
action that allows both the user and each ally in a Close Burst 1 to shift 1
square, as long as they all end up adjacent to each other. This allows a group
of hobgoblins to slowly advance as a unit, with no gaps in their
formation. Hobgoblin Resilience still makes an appearance in the MV stat blocks,
but only once.

### Hobgoblin Grunt (MM)

The rank and file of a hobgoblin army, these are Level 3 Skirmisher
minions. They wear leather and wield a light shield and a longsword. They have
Hobgoblin Resilience and Phalanx Soldier, but no other special tricks.

There's also a Hobgoblin Warrior that's identical to the grunt, but is level 8.

### Hobgoblin Archer (MM)

These are Level 3 Artillery with 39 HP. They have Hobgoblin Resilience, but no
formation-related traits. Their gear is similar to the grunt's with the addition
of a longbow and quiver of arrows.

Their longsword attacks are nothing special; longbow attacks grant an ally
within 5 squares of the target a +2 bonus to hit it on their next attack. The
little "tactics" paragraph for archers says they have a Coordinated Fire trait,
but that's absent from the actual stat block. Not sure if it was ever added on
errata or not.

Still, they do very well as support for melee combatants in addition to being a
source of ranged damage themselves. With "coordinated fire" not being a thing,
you should spread your archers out in a loose skirmish line beyond the reach of
melee PCs.

### Hobgoblin Soldier (MM)

Hobgoblin Soldiers are Level 3 Soldiers with 47 HP, and a very good case study
of how Hobgoblin Resilience and Phalanx Soldier together can be frustrating.

Being soldiers, their AC is already higher than normal - in fact, at 20, it's 1
point higher than the new math says it should be. Phalanx Soldier gives then
another +2 on top of that when you have multiple adjacent hobgoblins (which you
will _always_ have). They'll also outright ignore about half of the effects
that require saves that are thrown their way.

They will usually be facing level 1-3 PCs, which will likely not be able to
throw multiple save effects per round to overcome their resilience. And they'll
be as hard to hit as level 6 soldiers until there is one lone hobgoblin
left. They party is in for a long fight.

Offensively, hob soldiers fight with flails. Their basic attack both marks and
slows for a turn, and they can also perform a Formation Strike that does the
same damage and allows them to shift 1 square to end up adjacent to another
hobgoblin. So that fight is going to last even longer because the PCs will spend
much of it slowed and will find it hard to knock the hobs out of formation.

### Hobgoblin Battle Guard (MV)

This is the updated version of the Soldier above. It's a Level 3 Soldier with 49
HP and most of the original's frustrating features removed.

The flail attack still marks, but no longer slows. Hobgoblin Resilience is gone,
and Phalanx Soldier has been replaced by Share Shield, an interrupt that grants
an adjacent ally +2 to AC and Reflex against one attack that targets either of
those two defenses. Being an interrupt, it will only work once per turn, so it
can be overwhelmed by PCs without too much trouble. The Battle Guard gets
Phalanx Movement as well.

So in the end you have a soldier-type that gets stronger when it's in a tight
formation with its fellow soldiers, but not so strong as to make the fight
impossible or super-long. It's also easier to disrupt that formation.

### Hobgoblin Spear Soldier (MV)

A Level 3 Skirmisher with 48 HP, the spear soldier was made to complement the
Battle Guard above. It wields a longspear and carries a sheaf of javelins.

You want to have a line of spear soldiers in formation behind a line of battle
guards. All of them will advance together via Phalanx Movement. The spearhobs
will throw those Range 20 javelins as the unit closes in, and once melee starts
will attack with their Reach 2 spears from behind the safety of the battle guard
shield wall. Yes, Share Shield works on allies behind the user. If a PC manages
to get adjacent to one of them, they can shift 3 squares as a reaction.

### Hobgoblin Beast Master (MV)

Beast masters are Level 3 Controllers (Leaders) with 47 HP. While goblins prefer
to use their tamed beasts as mounts, these hobs are trained to wrangle a pack of
attack animals. They wield a goad (works as a war pick) in one hand and a whip
in the other.

Whenever a beast or magical beast ally adjacent to the beast master hits with an
attack, it gains 5 temporary HP. The beast master's goad is a basic attack, and
the whip does damage and knocks down on a hit, and can slide the target 1 square
as an effect. It can also choose to give an attack order to an adjacent beast or
magical beast ally, giving it a Lazy Warlord-style free basic attack.

The beast master has Phalanx Movement, which _does_ work on its beasts since the
ability doesn't specify the affected allies must be hobgoblins.

### Hobgoblin Warcaster (MM)

A Level 3 Controller (Leader) with 46 HP, representing a wizard who specializes
in electricity and force spells.

Warcasters carry staffs that do piddly damage as basic attacks, but which can be
charged with electricity (Melee 1 vs. AC; recharge 4-6) to do respectable
lightning damage and daze for a turn.

They can attack at range with force spells: Force Lure (Ranged 5 vs. Fortitude;
recharge 5-6) does force damage and slides 3 squares on a hit; Force Pulse
(Close Blast 5 vs. Reflex; Recharge 6) also does force damage, pushes 1 square
and knocks targets down. On a miss, it does half damage with no riders.

The warcaster doesn't get special bonuses from being in formation, but it
benefits from Hobgoblin Resilience.

### Hobgoblin Warmonger (MV)

This Level 4 Artillery (Leader) monster has 46 HP and is basically an upgraded
version of the Archer we already saw. It uses a mace in melee and a longbow at
range.

Its arrows do a fair bit of damage and cause the target to grant combat
advantage for a turn, which is simpler and more powerful than the archer's
rider. It can also use a Battle Cry (Area burst 1 within 10 vs. Will) that has a
somewhat complicated effect.

Each ally in the burst gets to charge or make a basic attack as a free
action. If they hit, they gain 5 temporary HP. Each _enemy_ in the burst is
subject to an attack against their Will, and if hit must make a basic attack
against a creature of the warmonger's choosing. It yells "kill the wizard!" with
such conviction even the PCs must make an effort not to follow the order! Less
facetiously, this is likely some sort of Bane-powered charm, as it does have the
charm keyword.

Unlike the archer, the warmonger has Phalanx Movement, meaning it can march in
lockstep with its unit of bodyguards.

### Hobgoblin Commander (Both)

A rare goblinoid stat block that has the same name in both books. Commanders are
Level 5 Soldiers (Leaders) with 64 HP. They wear scale and wield heavy shields
and spears.

The commander's spear attacks mark for a turn. It also has a Lead from the Front
trait which gives its allies +2 to attack and damage for a turn against anyone
it hits with the spear.

While the commander lacks Phalanx Movement, it can issue orders for a Tactical
Deployment (Close Burst 5; recharge 5-6; minor action) to allow allies in the
burst to shift 3 squares. And it's the sole MV hobgoblin to have Hobgoblin
Resilience.

The older MM version is pretty much identical, except it has worse damage and
can shift 1 square if it hits with an opportunity attack.

### Hobgoblin Hand of Bane (MM)

Likely a powerful paladin of Bane. This is a Level 8 Elite Soldier with 184
HP. It wears plate, carries a heavy shield, and wields a flail.

This is the Flail of Dread, whose basic attacks mark for a turn and allow a
secondary attack against Will. A hit on that one gives the target -2 to all
defenses for the rest of the encounter or until the Hand of Bane dies. Yikes!

The flail can also be used in a Flail of Tyranny attack (recharge 6), which does
more damage and stuns for a turn on a hit.

Bane's Blessing gives the Hand a +4 to its damage rolls once it's first
bloodied, and it also has Hobgoblin Resilience. It lacks any formation-based
tricks, though.

## Final Impressions

The hobgoblin niche of being the "organized, militaristic" humanoids actually
makes them the most reasonable of the bunch. You still end up fighting them
quite often, but they're a lot more open to parley than any orc or gnoll as
depicted in these books. Heck, it's not impossible for a paragon party to hire
themselves a company of hobgoblin mercs to help deal with a major threat.

Eberron goes further on this by making them not actually villainous. Its human
nations view the goblin kingdom of Darguun with suspicion, and it might become a
real menace if the wrong clan ascends to power, but it's at it root no better or
worse than any other Khorvairian nation.
